
THE PRINCE
Niccolò Machiavelli
Translated and with an Introduction by
Harvey C. Mansfield
Second Edition
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS
Chicago and London
3
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 1985, 1998 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Second Edition 1998
Printed in the United States of America
07 06 05 04 03 02 01 3 4 5
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 1469–1527.
[Principe. English]
The prince / Niccolò Machiavelli : translated with an introduction by Harvey C.
Mansfield.—2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-226-50043-8 (alk. paper).—ISBN 0-226-50044-6 (pbk. : alk. paper)—ISBN 978-
0-226-50050-8 (ebook)
1. Political science—Early works to 1800. 2. Political ethics—Early works to 1800. I.
Title.
JC143.M38 1998
320.1—dc21
98-5772
CIP
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the
American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for
Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992
2
Contents
Introduction
A Note on the Translation
Chronology
Map
The Prince
Dedicatory Letter
I. How Many Are the Kinds of Principalities and in What Modes
They Are Acquired
II. Of Hereditary Principalities
III. Of Mixed Principalities
IV. Why the Kingdom of Darius Which Alexander Seized Did
Not Rebel from His Successors after Alexander’s Death
V. How Cities or Principalities Which Lived by Their Own Laws
before They Were Occupied Should Be Administered
VI. Of New Principalities That Are Acquired through One’s
Own Arms and Virtue
VII. Of New Principalities That Are Acquired by Others’ Arms
and Fortune
VIII. Of Those Who Have Attained a Principality through
Crimes
IX. Of the Civil Principality
X. In What Mode the Forces of All Principalities Should Be
Measured
XI. Of Ecclesiastical Principalities
4
XII. How Many Kinds of Military There Are and Concerning
Mercenary Soldiers
XIII. Of Auxiliary, Mixed, and One’s Own Soldiers
XIV. What a Prince Should Do Regarding the Military
XV. Of Those Things for Which Men and Especially Princes Are
Praised or Blamed
XVI. Of Liberality and Parsimony
XVII. Of Cruelty and Mercy, and Whether It Is Better to Be
Loved Than Feared, or the Contrary
XVIII. In What Mode Faith Should Be Kept by Princes
XIX. Of Avoiding Contempt and Hatred
XX. Whether Fortresses and Many Other Things Which Are
Made and Done by Princes Every Day Are Useful or Useless
XXI. What a Prince Should Do to Be Held in Esteem
XXII. Of Those Whom Princes Have as Secretaries
XXIII. In What Mode Flatterers Are to Be Avoided
XXIV. Why the Princes of Italy Have Lost Their States
XXV. How Much Fortune Can Do in Human Affairs, and in
What Mode It May Be Opposed
XXVI. Exhortation to Seize Italy and to Free Her from the
Barbarians
Appendix
Machiavelli’s Letter of December 10, 1513
Glossary
Notes
Bibliography
Index of Proper Names
5
A Note on the Translation
In this translation I have sought to be as literal and exact as is
consistent with readable English. Since I am convinced that
Machiavelli was one of the greatest and subtlest minds to whom
we have access, I take very seriously the translator’s obligation
to present a writer’s thought in his own words, insofar as
possible. It did not seem to me my duty, therefore, to find a
rough equivalent to Machiavelli’s words in up-to-date,
colloquial prose, and to avoid cognates at all costs. For example,
I am not embarrassed to translate provincia “province” and patria
“fatherland” because these English words are perfectly
intelligible even though they are not the expressions we would
use today. It is worthwhile trying to retain the connotations of
those words as Machiavelli used them, as well as trying to avoid
the connotations of their modern equivalents, such as “nation.”
With this intent in translation, I have tried to retain some flavor
of Machiavelli’s style by preserving his favorite expressions and
some of his crowded sentences and difficult grammar. If the
result seems a little old-fashioned, so it should. Machiavelli’s
text will live without our help, and it will die if we suffocate it
with the sort of hospitality that allows it to live with us only on
our terms.
As to exactness, I would have liked never to vary the
translation of such important words as impresa, modo, and
respetto, but I found it impossible to produce a readable version
with such a rule. I have kept virtù as “virtue,” so that readers of
this translation can follow and join the dispute over the meaning
25
Machiavelli attaches to the word. If his use of it sounds strange,
as it did when he wrote and still does today, then let the reader
wonder at finding something strange. It is not the translator’s
business to make everything familiar.
For some of my departures from consistency, I have noted the
literal meaning in the notes. I have surely not varied the
translation merely for the sake of elegance. We should not be so
certain that we know what Machiavelli’s key terms or concepts
are. Frequently he will use a word or phrase several times in
close proximity, and such density of usage can alert us to the
importance of that word in that context. His pronouns are often
ambiguous in their reference, and I have sometimes had to
make a choice that he leaves open. I have indicated in the notes
the occasions on which Machiavelli departs from his usual
familiar “you” and addresses a formal or plural “you,” a “you”
who is asked to see, consider, or think something.
In the spirit of accuracy, I have not provided long historical
notes to explain Machiavelli’s examples. The Prince is not a
history book. It was written, we believe, in 1513, and it was
dedicated, we know, to Lorenzo de’ Medici. But it was written
for the future and addressed above all others, including
Lorenzo, to “whoever understands it” (Chapter 15). This does
not mean that readers who want to understand The Prince can
ignore Machiavelli’s examples and merely make a list of his
sensational assertions. On the contrary, those assertions are
always modified, sometimes even contradicted, by the
examples. But the examples will not serve as examples if the
reader does not look carefully at the information Machiavelli
gives him. He may miss the point if he allows this information
to be superseded by the superior historical knowledge of our
day.
26
The text of The Prince has many variations arising from the
facts that no original manuscript in Machiavelli’s hand exists
and that the work was not published in his lifetime under his
supervision. Those who want to examine the philological
scholarship seeking to establish an authoritative text should
begin with the article of Quaglio listed in the bibliography. I
have followed the text of Casella for the most part, adopting
some variants where they seemed appropriate.
Such are the principles of this translation. I have profited from
other translations, especially from that of Leo Paul S. de
Alvarez. If the reader thinks my translation a bad one, let him
try his own; if he thinks it good, let him learn Italian.
27
Chronology
1469 (May 3) NM born in Florence, son of
Bernardo(October) Ferdinand, heir to Aragon, marries
Isabella, heir to Castille (December) death of Piero de’
Medici
1476 Niccolò at school
1478 Pazzi conspiracy in which Giuliano is killed in the
cathedral and Lorenzo escapes, becoming the
dominant figure in Florence
1482 Savonarola begins to preach in Florence
1483 death of Louis XI, king of France; Charles VIII succeeds
at age 13
1491 marriage of Charles VIII with Anne of Brittany,
effectively the unification of France
1492 taking of Granada by Ferdinand, effectively the
unification of Spain
(April 8) death of Lorenzo de’ Medici (Lorenzo the
Magnificent), succeeded by his son Piero
(August 11) Rodrigo Borja (Borgia) becomes pope;
takes name of Alexander VI
1494 King Charles VIII of France invades Italy; the Medici
expelled from Florence; Savonarola gains authority
there
1498 (April 8) death of Charles VIII, succeeded by Louis XII
(May 23) Savonarola excommunicated and burned at
28
the stake in the Piazza della Signoria in Florence
NM put at head of Second Chancery of the Florentine
Republic, also Secretary to the Ten of War
Cesare Borgia (son of Pope Alexander VI) made Duke
of the Valentinois (Duke Valentino)
1499 mission of NM to Forlì
(August–October) Army of Louis XII enters Italy,
capturesMilan
(September 28) Paolo Vitelli, condottiere for Florence,
led to Florence and beheaded
1500 (February 5) Ludovico Sforza (il Moro) retakes Milan
from the French
(April 10) French retake Milan and imprison Ludovico
(June and July) NM at the Florentine siege of Pisa
(August 7-December) NM on mission to court of
France, meeting Louis XII and Georges d’Amboise,
Cardinal of Rouen
1501 (February 2) NM at Pistoia
Cesare Borgia named Duke of Romagna by his father
(August 18) NM in Siena with its lord, Pandolfo
Petrucci
NM marries Marietta Corsini
1502 NM on missions to Cesare Borgia in Romagna
(December 31) Cesare has Vitellozzo (brother of Paolo
Vitelli) and Oliverotto strangled at Sinigaglia
1503 (August 18) death of Alexander VI
(October 23-December 18) NM on mission to Rome
(November 1) Julius II created pope; he then forces
29
Cesare
Borgia to give over his conquests to the Church
1504 NM again sent to France; writes the first Decennale, a
poem on events in Italy since 1494
1505 NM sent on missions to Perugia, Mantua, Siena; begins
on plan for militia in Florence
1506 NM sent to Julius II, follows him in his expedition to
the Romagna
(September 13) NM with Julius II as he enters Perugia,
ruled by Baglioni
1507 NM on mission to court of Emperor Maximilian;
Cesare Borgia dies
1508 (February) NM at the siege of Pisa
1509 NM again in France and Siena
1511 (October 4) Pope Julius forms Holy League to resist
France
1512 (April 11) Battle of Ravenna won by France, but its
general, Gaston de Foix, killed
(August 31) Piero Soderini overthrown; Florentine
republic ends; Medici family returns to power
(November 7) NM expelled from his position
1513 (February 19) NM suspected of conspiracy against the
Medici; he is arrested, imprisoned, and tortured
(February 21) death of Pope Julius II; succeeded by
Giovanni de’ Medici, Pope Leo X
(March 13) NM freed; exiled to his country home in
Sant’Andrea in Percussina, south of Florence
(December 10) NM writes to his friend Francesco
30
Vettori
that he has completed The Prince; he also begins
writing his Discourses on Livy
1515 (January 1) death of Louis XII, Francis I succeeds
1516 (January 23) death of Ferdinand of Aragon; Charles V
succeeds
1517 NM writes the Golden Ass, an unfinished poem;
frequents the Orti Oricellari, gardens owned by his
friend Cosimo Rucellai, for philosophical discussions
1518 NM writes his comedy the Mandragola
1520 NM writes The Life of Castruccio Castracani; is
commissioned by Cardinal Giulio de’ Medici to write
the Florentine Histories
1521 publication of NM’s The Art of War
1522 Cardinal Giulio de’ Medici succeeds to papacy as
Clement VII
1525 NM in Rome presents the Florentine Histories to
Clement VII
1527 Rome sacked by Emperor Charles V
(June 21) death of Machiavelli; buried in the Church of
Santa Croce in Florence
1531 first edition published of NM’s Discourses on Livy, with
papal privilege
1532 first edition published of NM’s The Prince, also with
papal privilege
31
32
THE PRINCE
33
Dedicatory Letter
Niccolò Machiavelli to the Magnificent Lorenzo de’ Medici:
It is customary most of the time for those who desire to
acquire favor
1 with a Prince to come to meet him with things
that they care most for among their own or with things that they
see please him most. Thus, one sees them2 many times being
presented with horses, arms, cloth of gold, precious stones and
similar ornaments worthy of their greatness. Thus, since I desire
to offer myself to your Magnificence
3 with some testimony of
my homage
4
to you, I have found nothing in my belongings that
I care so much for and esteem so greatly as the knowledge of the
actions of great men, learned by me from long experience with
modern things and a continuous reading of ancient ones.
Having thought out and examined these things with great
diligence for a long time, and now reduced them to one small
volume, I send it to your Magnificence.
And although I judge this work undeserving of your
presence, yet I have much confidence that through your
humanity it may be accepted, considering that no greater gift
could be made by me than to give you the capacity to be able to
understand in a very short time all that I have learned and
understood in so many years and with so many hardships and
dangers for myself. I have not ornamented this work, nor filled
it with fulsome phrases nor with pompous and magnificent
words, nor with any blandishment or superfluous ornament
whatever, with which it is customary for many to describe and
adorn their things. For I wanted it either not to be honored for
34
anything or to please solely for the variety of the matter and the
gravity of the subject. Nor do I want it to be reputed
presumption if a man from a low and mean state dares to
discuss and give rules for the governments of princes. For just as
those who sketch landscapes place themselves down in the plain
to consider the nature of mountains and high places and to
consider the nature of low places place themselves high atop
mountains, similarly, to know well the nature of peoples one
needs to be prince, and to know well the nature of princes one
needs to be of the people.
Therefore, your Magnificence, take this small gift in the spirit
5
with which I send it. If your Magnificence considers and reads it
diligently, you will learn from it my extreme desire that you
arrive at the greatness that fortune and your other qualities
promise you. And if your Magnificence will at some time turn
your eyes from the summit of your height to these low places,
you will learn how undeservedly I endure a great and
continuous malignity of fortune.
35
OF PRINCIPALITIES
I
How Many Are the Kinds of Principalities
and in What Modes They Are Acquired
1
All states,
2 all dominions that have held and do hold empire
over men have been and are either republics or principalities.
The principalities are either hereditary, in which the bloodline
3
of their lord has been their prince for a long time, or they are
new. The new ones are either altogether new, as was Milan to
Francesco Sforza,
4 or they are like members added to the
hereditary state of the prince who acquires them, as is the
kingdom of Naples to the king of Spain.
5 Dominions so acquired
are either accustomed to living under a prince or used to being
free; and they are acquired either with the arms of others or
with one’s own, either by fortune or by virtue.
6
36
II
Of Hereditary Principalities
I shall leave out reasoning on republics because I have reasoned
on them at length another time.
1
I shall address myself only to
the principality, and shall proceed by weaving together the
threads mentioned above; and I shall debate how these
principalities may be governed and maintained.
I say, then, that in hereditary states accustomed to the
bloodline
2 of their prince the difficulties in maintaining them are
much less than in new states because it is enough only not to
depart from the order of his ancestors, and then to temporize in
the face of accidents. In this way, if such a prince is of ordinary
industry,
3 he will always maintain himself in his state unless
there is an extraordinary and excessive force which deprives
him of it; and should he be deprived of it, if any mishap
whatever befalls the occupier, he reacquires it.
We have in Italy, for example, the duke of Ferrara, who, for
no other cause than that his line was ancient in that dominion,
did not succumb to the attacks of the Venetians in ’84, nor to
those of Pope Julius in ’10.
4 For the natural prince has less cause
and less necessity to offend;
5 hence it is fitting that he be more
loved. And if extraordinary vices do not make him hated, it is
reasonable that he will naturally have the good will of his own.
In the antiquity and continuity of the dominion the memories
and causes of innovations are eliminated; for one change always
leaves a dentation
6
for the building of another.
37
III
Of Mixed Principalities
But the difficulties reside in the new principality First, if it is not
altogether new but like an added member (so that taken as a
whole it can be called almost mixed), its instability arises in the
first place from a natural difficulty that exists in all new
principalities. This is
1
that men willingly change their lords in
the belief that they will fare better: this belief makes them take
up arms against him, in which they are deceived because they
see later by experience that they have done worse. That follows
from another natural and ordinary necessity which requires that
one must always offend those over whom he becomes a new
prince, both with men-at-arms and with infinite other injuries
that the new acquisition brings in its wake. So you have as
enemies all those whom you have offended in seizing that
principality, and you cannot keep as friends those who have put
you there because you cannot satisfy them in the mode they had
presumed and because you cannot use strong medicines against
them, since you are obligated to them. For even though one may
have the strongest of armies, he always needs the support of the
inhabitants of a province
2
in order to enter it. Through these
causes Louis XII of France quickly occupied Milan, and quickly
lost it; and Ludovico’s own forces were enough to take it from
him the first time.
3 For those people which had opened the gates
to him, finding themselves deceived in their opinion and in that
future good they had presumed for themselves, were unable to
38
tolerate the vexations of the new prince.
It is indeed true that when countries that have rebelled are
later acquired for the second time, they are lost with more
difficulty, because the lord, seizing the opportunity offered by
the rebellion, is less hesitant
4
to secure himself by punishing
offenders, exposing suspects, and providing for himself in the
weakest spots. So it was that, if one Duke Ludovico stirring up a
commotion at the borders was enough to make France lose
Milan the first time, to make him then lose it the second time,
the whole world had to be against him, and his armies
eliminated or chased from Italy: this arises from the causes
given above. Nonetheless, both the first and the second times it
was taken from him.
The universal causes of the first have been discussed; it
remains now to say what were the causes of the second, and to
see what remedies there were to him, which someone in his
situation could use so as to maintain himself better in his
acquisition than France did. Now I say, that such states which,
when acquired, are added to an ancient state of him who
acquires them, are either of the same province and same
language, or not. When they are, they may be held with great
ease, especially if they are not used to living free; and to possess
them securely it is enough to have eliminated the line of the
prince whose dominions they were. For when their old
conditions are maintained for them in other things and there is
no disparity of customs, men live quietly—as it may be seen that
Burgundy, Brittany, Gascony, and Normandy, which have been
with France for so long a time, have done;
5 and although there
may be some disparity of language, nonetheless the customs are
similar, and they can easily bear with one another. And
whoever acquires them, if he wants to hold them, must have
39
two concerns: one, that the bloodline of their ancient prince be
eliminated; the other, not to alter either their laws or their taxes:
so that in a very short time it becomes one whole body with
their ancient principality.
But when one acquires states in a province disparate in
language, customs, and orders, here are the difficulties, and here
one needs to have great fortune and great industry to hold
them; and one of the greatest and quickest remedies would be
for whoever acquires it to go there to live in person. This would
make that possession more secure and more lasting, as the Turk
has done in Greece. Despite all the other orders observed by him
so as to hold that state, if he had not gone there to live, it would
not have been possible for him to hold it. For if you stay there,
disorders may be seen as they arise, and you can soon remedy
them; if you are not there, disorders become understood when
they are great and there is no longer a remedy. Besides this, the
province is not despoiled by your officials; the subjects are
satisfied with ready access to the prince, so that they have more
cause to love him if they want to be good and, if they want to be
otherwise, more cause to fear him. Whatever outsider might
want to attack that state has more hesitation in doing so; hence,
when one lives in it, one can lose it with the greatest difficulty.
The other, better remedy is to send colonies that are, as it
were, fetters of that state, to one or two places, because it is
necessary either to do this or to hold them with many men-atarms and infantry. One does not spend much on colonies, and
without expense of one’s own, or with little, one may send them
and hold them; and one offends only those from whom one
takes fields and houses in order to give them to new inhabitants
—who are a very small part of that state. And those whom he
offends, since they remain dispersed and poor, can never harm
40
him, while all the others remain on the one hand unhurt, and for
this they should be quiet; on the other, they are afraid to err
from fear that what happened to the despoiled might happen to
them. I conclude that such colonies are not costly, are more
faithful, and less offensive; and those who are offended can do
no harm, since they are poor and dispersed as was said. For this
has to be noted: that men should either be caressed or
eliminated, because they avenge themselves for slight offenses
but cannot do so for grave ones; so the offense one does to a
man should be such that one does not fear revenge for it. But
when one holds a state with men-at-arms in place of colonies,
one spends much more since one has to consume all the income
of that state in guarding it. So the acquisition turns to loss, and
one offends much more because one harms the whole state as
one’s army moves around for lodgings. Everyone feels this
hardship, and each becomes one’s enemy: and these are enemies
that can harm one since they remain, though defeated, in their
homes. From every side, therefore, keeping guard in this way is
as useless as keeping guard by means of colonies is useful.
Whoever is in a province that is disparate, as was said, should
also make himself head and defender of the neighboring lesser
powers, and contrive to weaken the powerful in that province
and to take care that through some accident a foreigner as
powerful as he does not enter there. And it will always turn out
that a foreigner will be brought in by those in the province who
are malcontent either because of too much ambition or out of
fear, as once the Aetolians were seen to bring the Romans into
Greece; and in every other province they entered, they were
brought in by its inhabitants. And the order of things is such
that as soon as a powerful foreigner enters a province, all those
in it who are less powerful adhere to him, moved by the envy
41
they have against whoever has held power over them. So with
respect to these lesser powers, he has no trouble in gaining
them, because all together they quickly and willingly make one
mass with the state that he has acquired there. He has only to
worry that these lesser powers may get too much force and too
much authority; and with his forces and their support he can
easily put down those who are powerful, so as to remain arbiter
of that province in everything. And whoever does not conduct
this policy well will soon lose what he has acquired, and while
he holds it, will have infinite difficulties and vexations within it.
The Romans observed these policies well in the provinces
they took. They sent out colonies, indulged the lesser powers
without increasing their power, put down the powerful, and did
not allow foreign powers to gain reputation there. And I want
the province of Greece alone to suffice as an example. The
Achaeans and the Aetolians were indulged by the Romans; the
kingdom of the Macedonians was brought down and Antiochus
was chased out. Nor did the merits of the Achaeans or those of
the Aetolians make the Romans permit them to increase any
state of theirs; nor did the persuasions of Philip ever induce
them to be his friends without putting him down; nor could the
power of Antiochus make them consent to his holding any state
in that province. For the Romans did in these cases what all wise
princes should do: they not only have to have regard for present
troubles
6 but also for future ones, and they have to avoid these
with all their industry because, when one foresees from afar,
one can easily find a remedy for them but when you wait until
they come close to you, the medicine is not in time because the
disease has become incurable. And it happens with this as the
physicians say of consumption, that in the beginning of the
illness it is easy to cure and difficult to recognize, but in the
42
progress of time, when it has not been recognized and treated in
the beginning, it becomes easy to recognize and difficult to cure.
So it happens in affairs of state, because when one recognizes
from afar the evils that arise in a state (which is not given but to
one who is prudent), they are soon healed; but when they are
left to grow because they were not recognized, to the point that
everyone recognizes them, there is no longer any remedy for
them.
Thus, the Romans, seeing inconveniences from afar, always
found remedies for them and never allowed them to continue so
as to escape a war, because they knew that war may not be
avoided but is deferred to the advantage of others. So they
decided to make war with Philip and Antiochus in Greece in
order not to have to do so in Italy; and they could have avoided
both one and the other for a time, but they did not want to. Nor
did that saying ever please them which is every day in the
mouths of the wise men of our times—to enjoy the benefit of
time—but rather, they enjoyed the benefit of their virtue and
prudence. For time sweeps everything before it and can bring
with it good as well as evil and evil as well as good.
But let us return to France and examine whether he has done
any of the things spoken of. I will speak of Louis and not of
Charles,
7 as the steps of the former, because he held his
possession in Italy longer, may be seen better. And you
8 will see
that he did the contrary of the things that should be done to
hold a state in a disparate province.
King Louis was brought into Italy by the ambition of the
Venetians, who wanted to gain half the state of Lombardy for
themselves by his coming. I do not want to blame the course
adopted by the king; for since he wanted to begin by gaining a
foothold in Italy, and having no friends in this province, indeed,
43
having all doors closed to him because of the conduct of King
Charles, he was forced to take whatever friendships he could
get. And having firmly adopted this course he would have
succeeded if in managing other things he had not made some
error. Thus, when he had acquired Lombardy, the king regained
quickly the reputation that Charles had taken from him: Genoa
yielded, and the Florentines became his friends; the marquis of
Mantua, duke of Ferrara, Bentivoglio, Madonna of Forlì, the
lords of Faenza, of Pesaro, of Rimini, of Camerino, of Piombino,
the Luccans, Pisans, and Sienese—everyone came to meet him
so as to become his friend. And then the Venetians could
consider the temerity of the course they had adopted: to acquire
two lands in Lombardy they made the king lord of two-thirds
9
of Italy.
One may now consider with how little difficulty the king
could have maintained his reputation in Italy if he had observed
the rules written above and had held secure and defended all
those friends of his, who, because they were a great number,
weak, and fearful—some of the Church, some of the Venetians
—were always under a necessity to stay with him; and by their
means he could always have secured himself easily against
whoever remained great among us. But no sooner was he in
Milan than he did the contrary by giving aid to Pope Alexander
so that the pope might seize the Romagna. Nor did he notice
that with this decision he was weakening himself, stripping
himself of his friends and those who had jumped into his lap,
while making the Church great by adding so much temporal
greatness to the spiritual one that gives it so much authority.
And having made the first error, he was compelled to continue,
so that to put an end to the ambition of Alexander, and to
prevent his becoming lord of Tuscany, he was compelled to
44
come into Italy. It was not enough for him to have made the
Church great and to have stripped himself of his friends, but
because he wanted the kingdom of Naples, he divided it with
the king of Spain. Whereas at first he was the arbiter of Italy, he
brought in a companion so that the ambitious ones in that
province and those malcontent with him had somewhere to
turn; and whereas he could have left in that kingdom10 a king
who was his pensioner, he threw him out so as to bring in one
who could expel him.
And truly it is a very natural and ordinary thing to desire to
acquire, and always, when men do it who can, they will be
praised or not blamed; but when they cannot, and wish to do it
anyway, here lie the error and the blame. Thus, if France could
have attacked Naples with his own forces, he should have done
so; if he could not, he should not have divided Naples. And if
the division of Lombardy he made with the Venetians deserves
excuse because with it France gained a foothold in Italy, this
other one deserves blame because it was not excused by that
necessity.
So then Louis had made these five errors: he had eliminated
the lesser powers; increased the power of a power in Italy;
brought in a very powerful foreigner; did not come to live there;
did not put colonies there. Yet if he had lived, these errors could
not have hurt him if he had not made a sixth: depriving the
Venetians of their state. For if he had not made the Church great
or brought Spain into Italy, it would indeed have been
reasonable and necessary to put down the Venetians. But when
he had adopted these courses first, he should never have
consented to their ruin, for while they were powerful they
would always have kept others away from a campaign in
Lombardy, whether it was because the Venetians would not
45
have consented to them unless they themselves were to become
its lords, or because the others would not have wanted to take
Lombardy from France in order to give it to the Venetians, and
they would not have had the spirit to go and attack both of
them. And if someone should say: King Louis ceded Romagna
to Alexander and the Kingdom11
to Spain to avoid a war, I reply
with the reasons given above: that a disorder should never be
allowed to continue so as to avoid a war, because that is not to
avoid it but to defer it to your disadvantage. And if some others
should cite the faith that the king had pledged to the pope, to
undertake that enterprise for him in return for dissolving his
marriage and for the hat of Rouen,
12
I reply with what I will say
below on the faith of princes and how it should be observed.
13
Thus, King Louis lost Lombardy for not having observed any of
the conditions observed by others who have taken provinces
and wished to hold them. Nor is this any miracle, but very
ordinary and reasonable. And I spoke of this matter at Nantes
with Rouen
14 when Valentino (for so Cesare Borgia, son of Pope
Alexander, was called by the people) was occupying Romagna.
For when the cardinal of Rouen said to me that the Italians do
not understand war, I replied to him that the French do not
understand the state, because if they understood they would not
have let the Church come to such greatness. And it may be seen
from experience that the greatness in Italy of the Church and of
Spain has been caused by France, and France’s ruin caused by
them. From this one may draw a general rule that never or
rarely fails: whoever is the cause of someone’s becoming
powerful is ruined; for that power has been caused by him
either with industry or with force, and both the one and the
other of these two are suspect to whoever has become powerful.
46
IV
Why the Kingdom of Darius Which
Alexander Seized Did Not Rebel from His
Successors after Alexander’s Death
The difficulties that are involved in holding a state newly
acquired having been considered, one might marvel at how it
happened that Alexander the Great became lord of Asia in a few
years, and just after he had seized it, died—from which it
appeared reasonable that all that state would rebel—nonetheless
the successors of Alexander maintained it and had no other
difficulty in holding it than that which arose among themselves
out of their own ambition.
1
I reply that principalities of which
memory remains have been governed in two diverse modes:
either by one prince, and all the others servants who as
ministers help govern the kingdom by his favor and
appointment; or by a prince and by barons who hold that rank
not by favor of the lord but by antiquity of bloodline. Such
barons have their own states and subjects who recognize them
as lords and hold them in natural affection. States that are
governed by one prince and his servants hold their prince in
greater authority because in all his province there is no one
recognized as superior but himself; and if they obey someone
else, they do so as a minister and official, and do not bear him
any particular love.
In our times the examples of these two diverse kinds of
government are the Turk and the king of France. The whole
47
monarchy of the Turk is governed by one lord; the others are his
servants. Dividing his kingdom into sanjaks,
2 he sends different
administrators to them, and he changes and varies them as he
likes. But the king of France is placed in the midst of an ancient
multitude of lords, acknowledged in that state by their subjects
and loved by them: they have their privileges, and the king
cannot take them away without danger to himself. Thus,
whoever considers the one and the other of these states will find
difficulty in acquiring the state of the Turk, but should it be
conquered, great ease in holding it. So inversely, you
3 will find
in some respects more ease in seizing the state of France, but
great difficulty in holding it.
The causes of the difficulties in being able to seize the
kingdom of the Turk are that one cannot be called in by the
princes in that kingdom, and that one cannot hope to facilitate
the enterprise through the rebellion of those around him. This
arises from the reasons given above, for, since all are slaves and
bound by obligation, they can be corrupted with much
difficulty, and even if they are corrupted, one can hope but for
little use from it, as they cannot bring their peoples with them,
for the reasons indicated. Hence, whoever attacks the Turk must
necessarily assume that he will find him entirely united, and he
had better put his hope more in his own forces than in the
disorders of others. But once the Turk has been overcome and
defeated in the field in such a way that he cannot rally his
armies, one has only to fear the bloodline of the prince. If this is
eliminated, there remains no one whom one would have to fear,
since others do not have credit with the people; and just as the
victor could put no hope in them before his victory, so he
should not fear them after it.
The contrary occurs with kingdoms governed like France,
48
because you can easily enter there, having won over to yourself
some baron of the kingdom; for malcontents and those who
desire to innovate are always to be found. For the reasons given,
they can open the way for you into that state and facilitate
victory for you. Then your wish to maintain that victory for
yourself brings in its wake infinite difficulties both from those
who have helped you and from those you have oppressed. Nor
is it enough for you to eliminate the bloodline of the prince,
because lords remain there who put themselves at the head of
new changes; and since you can neither content them nor
eliminate them, you lose that state whenever their opportunity
comes.
Now, if you
4 consider what was the nature of Darius’s
5
government, you
6 will find it similar to the kingdom of the
Turk. Therefore, for Alexander it was necessary first to make an
all-out attack on him and drive him from the field; after this
victory, with Darius dead, that state remained secure for
Alexander for the reasons discussed above. And if his
successors had been united, they could have enjoyed it at
leisure, nor did any tumults occur in that kingdom besides those
they themselves incited. But it is impossible to possess states
ordered like France with such quiet. Hence arose the frequent
rebellions in Spain, France,
7 and Greece against the Romans,
because of the numerous principalities that existed in those
states. As long as their memory lasted, the Romans were always
uncertain of their possession, but when their memory was
eliminated with the power and long duration of the empire, the
Romans became secure possessors of them. And the Romans
possessed them even though, when they later fought among
themselves, each took for himself a part of those provinces in
accordance with the authority he had got within it; and the
49
provinces, because the bloodline of their former lords was
eliminated, acknowledged no one but the Romans. Having
considered all these things, therefore, no one will marvel at the
ease with which Alexander held the state of Asia and at the
difficulties others such as Pyrrhus
8 and many more like him had
in keeping their acquisitions. This has come not from much or
little virtue in the victor but from the disparity in the subject.
50
V
How Cities or Principalities Which Lived by
Their Own Laws before They Were
Occupied Should Be Administered
When those states that are acquired, as has been said, are
accustomed to living by their own laws and in liberty, there are
three modes for those who want to hold them: first, ruin them;
second, go there to live personally; third, let them live by their
laws, taking tribute from them and creating within them an
oligarchical state which keeps them friendly to you. For since
such a state has been created by that prince, it knows it cannot
stand without his friendship and power, and it has to do
everything to maintain him. And a city used to living free may
be held more easily by means of its own citizens than in any
other mode, if one wants to preserve it.
As examples there are the Spartans and the Romans. The
Spartans held Athens and Thebes by creating oligarchical states
there; yet they lost them again.
1 The Romans, in order to hold
Capua, Carthage, and Numantia, destroyed them and did not
lose them.
2 They wanted to hold Greece much as the Spartans
had held it, by making it free and leaving it its own laws. But
they did not succeed; so they were compelled to destroy many
cities in that province so as to hold it. For in truth there is no
secure mode to possess them other than to ruin them. And
whoever becomes patron of a city accustomed to living free and
does not destroy it, should expect to be destroyed by it; for it
51
always has as a refuge in rebellion the name of liberty and its
own ancient orders which are never forgotten either through
length of time or because of benefits received. Whatever one
does or provides for, unless the inhabitants are broken up or
dispersed, they will not forget that name and those orders, and
will immediately recur to them upon any accident as did Pisa
after having been kept in servitude a hundred years by the
Florentines.
3 But, when cities or provinces are used to living
under a prince, and his bloodline is eliminated—since on the
one hand they are used to obeying, and on the other they do not
have the old prince—they will not agree to make one from
among themselves and they do not know how to live free. So
they are slower to take up arms, and a prince can gain them
with greater ease and can secure himself against them. But in
republics there is greater life, greater hatred, more desire for
revenge; the memory of their ancient liberty does not and
cannot let them rest, so that the most secure path is to eliminate
them or live in them.
52
VI
Of New Principalities That Are Acquired
through One’s Own Arms and Virtue
No one should marvel if, in speaking as I will do of
principalities that are altogether new both in prince and in state,
I bring up the greatest examples. For since men almost always
walk on paths beaten by others and proceed in their actions by
imitation, unable either to stay on the paths of others altogether
or to attain the virtue of those whom you imitate, a prudent man
should always enter upon the paths beaten by great men, and
imitate those who have been most excellent, so that if his own
virtue does not reach that far, it is at least in the odor of it. He
should do as prudent archers do when the place they plan to hit
appears too distant, and knowing how far the strength
1 of their
bow carries, they set their aim much higher than the place
intended, not to reach such height with their arrow, but to be
able with the aid of so high an aim to achieve their plan.
I say, then, that in altogether new principalities, where there is
a new prince, one encounters more or less difficulty in
maintaining them according to whether the one who acquires
them is more or less virtuous. And because the result of
becoming prince from private individual presupposes either
virtue or fortune, it appears that one or the other of these two
things relieves in part many difficulties; nonetheless, he who has
relied less on fortune has maintained himself more. To have the
prince compelled to come to live there in person, because he has
53
no other states, makes it still easier. But, to come to those who
have become princes by their own virtue and not by fortune, I
say that the most excellent are Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus,
and the like. And although one should not reason about Moses,
as he was a mere executor of things that had been ordered for
him by God, nonetheless he should be admired if only for that
grace which made him deserving of speaking with God. But let
us consider Cyrus and the others who have acquired or founded
kingdoms: you
2 will find them all admirable; and if their
particular actions and orders are considered, they will appear
no different from those of Moses, who had so great a teacher.
And as one examines their actions and lives, one does not see
that they had anything else from fortune than the opportunity,
which gave them the matter enabling them to introduce any
form they pleased. Without that opportunity their virtue of
spirit would have been eliminated, and without that virtue the
opportunity would have come in vain.
It was necessary then for Moses to find the people of Israel in
Egypt, enslaved and oppressed by the Egyptians, so that they
would be disposed to follow him so as to get out of their
servitude. It was fitting that Romulus not be received in Alba,
that he should have been exposed at birth, if he was to become
king of Rome and founder of that fatherland. Cyrus needed to
find the Persians malcontent with the empire of the Medes, and
the Medes soft and effeminate because of a long peace. Theseus
could not have demonstrated his virtue if he had not found the
Athenians dispersed. Such opportunities, therefore, made these
men happy, and their excellent virtue enabled the opportunity
to be recognized; hence their fatherlands were ennobled by it
and became very happy.
Those like these men, who become princes by the paths of
54
virtue, acquire their principality with difficulty but hold it with
ease; and the difficulties they have in acquiring their
principality arise in part from the new orders and modes that
they are forced to introduce so as to found their state and their
security. And it should be considered that nothing is more
difficult to handle, more doubtful of success, nor more
dangerous to manage, than to put oneself at the head of
introducing new orders. For the introducer has all those who
benefit from the old orders as enemies, and he has lukewarm
defenders in all those who might benefit from the new orders.
This lukewarmness arises partly from fear of adversaries who
have the laws on their side and partly from the incredulity of
men, who do not truly believe in new things unless they come to
have a firm experience of them. Consequently, whenever those
who are enemies have opportunity to attack, they do so with
partisan zeal, and the others defend lukewarmly so that one is
in peril along with them. It is however necessary, if one wants to
discuss this aspect well, to examine whether these innovators
stand by themselves or depend on others; that is, whether to
carry out their deed they must beg
3 or indeed can use force. In
the first case they always come to ill and never accomplish
anything; but when they depend on their own and are able to
use force, then it is that they are rarely in peril. From this it
arises that all the armed prophets conquered and the unarmed
ones were ruined. For, besides the things that have been said,
the nature of peoples is variable; and it is easy to persuade them
of something, but difficult to keep them in that persuasion. And
thus things must be ordered in such a mode that when they no
longer believe, one can make them believe by force. Moses,
Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus would not have been able to
make their peoples observe their constitutions for long if they
55
had been unarmed, as happened in our times to Brother
Girolamo Savonarola. He was ruined in his new orders as soon
as the multitude began not to believe in them, and he had no
mode for holding firm those who had believed nor for making
unbelievers believe.
4 Men such as these, therefore, find great
difficulty in conducting their affairs; all their dangers are along
the path, and they must overcome them with virtue. But once
they have overcome them and they begin to be held in
veneration, having eliminated those who had envied them for
their quality, they remain powerful, secure, honored, and
happy.
To such high examples I want to add a lesser example, but it
will have some proportion with the others and I want it to
suffice for all other similar cases: this is Hiero of Syracuse. From
private individual he became prince of Syracuse, nor did he
receive anything more from fortune than the opportunity. For
when the Syracusans were oppressed, they chose him as their
captain, and from there he proved worthy of being made their
prince. And he was of such virtue, even in private fortune, that
he who wrote of him said “that he lacked nothing of being a
king except a kingdom.”
5 Hiero eliminated the old military and
organized a new one; he left his old friendships and made new
ones; and when he had friendships and soldiers that were his
own, he could build any building on top of such a foundation;
so he went through a great deal of trouble to acquire, and little
to maintain.
56
VII
Of New Principalities That Are Acquired by
Others’ Arms and Fortune
Those who become princes from private individual solely by
fortune become so with little trouble, but maintain themselves
with much. They have no difficulty along the path because they
fly there, but all the difficulties arise when they are in place.
And such princes come to be when a state is given to someone
either for money or by the favor of whoever gives it, as
happened to many in Greece, in the cities of Ionia and of the
Hellespont, where they were made princes by Darius so that
they might hold on to those cities for his security and glory;
1 as
also those emperors were made who from private individual
attained the empire through corrupting the soldiers.
2 These
persons rest simply on the will and fortune of whoever has
given a state to them, which are two very inconstant and
unstable things. They do not know how to hold and they cannot
hold that rank: they do not know how, because if one is not a
man of great ingenuity and virtue, it is not reasonable, that
having always lived in private fortune, he should know how to
command; they cannot hold that rank because they do not have
forces that can be friendly and faithful to them. Then, too, states
that come to be suddenly, like all other things in nature that are
born and grow quickly, cannot have roots and branches, so that
the first adverse weather
3 eliminates them—unless, indeed, as
was said, those who have suddenly become princes have so
57
much virtue that they know immediately how to prepare to
keep what fortune has placed in their laps; and the foundations
that others have laid before becoming princes they lay
afterwards.
To both of the modes mentioned of becoming prince, by
virtue or by fortune, I want to bring up two examples that have
occurred in days within our memory; and these are Francesco
Sforza and Cesare Borgia. Francesco became duke of Milan from
private individual by proper means
4 and with a great virtue of
his own; and that which he had acquired with a thousand pains
he maintained with little trouble. On the other hand Cesare
Borgia, called Duke Valentino by the vulgar, acquired his state
through the fortune of his father and lost it through the same,
notwithstanding the fact that he made use of every deed and
did all those things that should be done by a prudent and
virtuous man to put his roots in the states that the arms and
fortune of others had given him. For, as was said above,
whoever does not lay his foundations at first might be able, with
great virtue, to lay them later, although they might have to be
laid with hardship for the architect and with danger to the
building. Thus, if one considers all the steps of the duke, one
will see that he had laid for himself great foundations for future
power, which I do not judge superfluous to discuss; for I do not
know what better teaching I could give to a new prince than the
example of his actions. And if his orders did not bring profit to
him, it was not his fault, because this arose from an
extraordinary and extreme malignity of fortune.
Alexander VI had very many difficulties, both present and
future, when he decided to make his son the duke great. First,
he did not see the path to being able to make him lord of any
state that was not a state of the Church; and when he decided to
58
take that of the Church, he knew that the duke of Milan and the
Venetians would not consent to it because Faenza and Rimini
had for long been under the protection of the Venetians. Besides
this, he saw that the arms of Italy, and especially the arms of
anyone whom he might have been able to make use of, were in
the hands of those who had to fear the greatness of the pope;
and so he could not trust them, as they were all with the Orsini
and the Colonna and their accomplices.
5
It was thus necessary to
upset those orders and to bring disorder to their states so as to
be able to make himself lord securely of part of them. This was
easy for him, because he found that the Venetians, moved by
other causes, were engaged in getting the French to come back
into Italy, which he not only did not oppose but made easier by
the dissolution of the former marriage of King Louis. So the king
came into Italy with the aid of the Venetians and the consent of
Alexander, and he was no sooner in Milan than the pope got
men from him for a campaign in Romagna, which was granted
to him because of the reputation of the king. So after the duke
had acquired Romagna and beaten down the Colonna, two
things prevented him from maintaining that and going further
ahead: one, that his arms did not appear to him to be faithful;
the other, the will of France: that is, the Orsini arms of which he
had availed himself might fail under him, and not only prevent
him from acquiring but also take away what he had acquired;
and the king might also do the same to him. He had a test of the
Orsini when, after the capture of Faenza, he attacked Bologna
and saw them go coolly to that attack; and regarding the king,
the duke knew his mind when after he had taken the duchy of
Urbino, he attacked Tuscany, and the king made him desist
from that campaign. Hence the duke decided to depend no
longer on the arms and fortune of others. And the first thing he
59
did was to weaken the Orsini and Colonna parties in Rome. For
he gained to himself all their adherents, who were gentlemen,
by making them his gentlemen and by giving them large
allowances; and he honored them, according to their qualities,
with commands and with government posts, so that in a few
months the partisan affections in their minds were eliminated,
and all affection turned toward the duke. After this he waited
for an opportunity to eliminate the heads of the Orsini, since he
had dispersed those of the Colonna house. A good one came to
him, and he used it better; for when the Orsini became aware,
late, that the greatness of the duke and of the Church was ruin
for them, they held a meeting at Magione, near Perugia.
6 From
that arose rebellion in Urbino, tumults in Romagna, and infinite
dangers for the duke, who overcame them all with the aid of the
French. And when his reputation had been restored, he trusted
neither France nor other external forces, and so as not to put
them to the test, he turned to deceit. He knew so well how to
dissimulate his intent that the Orsini themselves, through Signor
Paolo, became reconciled with him. The duke did not fail to
fulfill every kind of duty to secure Signor Paolo, giving him
money, garments, and horses, so that their simplicity brought
them into the duke’s hands at Sinigaglia.
7 So, when these heads
had been eliminated, and their partisans had been turned into
his friends, the duke had laid very good foundations for his
power, since he had all Romagna with the duchy of Urbino. He
thought, especially, that he had acquired the friendship of
Romagna, and that he had gained all those peoples to himself
since they had begun to taste well-being.
And because this point is deserving of notice and of being
imitated by others, I do not want to leave it out. Once the duke
had taken over Romagna, he found it had been commanded by
60
impotent lords who had been readier to despoil their subjects
than to correct them, and had given their subjects matter for
disunion, not for union. Since that province was quite full of
robberies, quarrels, and every other kind of insolence, he judged
it necessary to give it good government, if he wanted to reduce
it to peace and obedience to a kingly arm. So he put there
Messer Remirro de Orco, a cruel and ready man, to whom he
gave the fullest power.
8
In a short time Remirro reduced it to
peace and unity, with the very greatest reputation for himself.
Then the duke judged that such excessive authority was not
necessary, because he feared that it might become hateful; and
he set up a civil court in the middle of the province, with a most
excellent president, where each city had its advocate. And
because he knew that past rigors had generated some hatred for
Remirro, to purge the spirits of that people and to gain them
entirely to himself, he wished to show that if any cruelty had
been committed, this had not come from him but from the harsh
nature of his minister. And having seized this opportunity, he
had him placed one morning in the piazza at Cesena in two
pieces, with a piece of wood and a bloody knife beside him. The
ferocity of this spectacle left the people at once satisfied and
stupefied.
But let us return to where we left off. I say that when the duke
found himself very powerful and secure in part against present
dangers—since he had armed to suit himself and had in good
part eliminated those arms which were near enough to have
attacked
9 him—there remained for him, if he wanted to proceed
with acquisition, to consider the king of France. For he knew
that this would not be tolerated by the king, who had been late
to perceive his error. And so he began to seek out new
friendships and to vacillate with France in the expedition that
61
the French were making toward the kingdom of Naples against
the Spanish who were besieging Gaeta. His intent was to secure
himself against them:
10
in which he would soon have succeeded,
if Alexander had lived.
And these were his arrangements as to present things. But as
to the future, he had to fear, first, that a new successor in the
Church might not be friendly to him and might seek to take
away what Alexander had given him. He thought he might
secure himself against this in four modes: first, to eliminate the
bloodlines of all those lords he had despoiled, so as to take that
opportunity away from the pope; second, to win over to himself
all the gentlemen in Rome, as was said, so as to be able to hold
the pope in check with them; third, to make the College of
Cardinals as much his as he could; fourth, to acquire so much
empire before the pope died that he could resist a first attack
11
on his own. Of these four things he had accomplished three at
the death of Alexander; the fourth he almost accomplished. For
of the lords he had despoiled he killed as many as he could
reach, and very few saved themselves; the Roman gentlemen
had been won over to himself; in the College he had a very large
party; and as to new acquisition, he had planned to become lord
over Tuscany, he already possessed Perugia and Piombino, and
he had taken Pisa under his protection. And, as soon as he did
not have to pay regard to France (which he did not have to do
any longer, since the French had already been stripped of the
kingdom by the Spanish, so that each of them was forced of
necessity to buy his friendship), he would have jumped on Pisa.
After this, Lucca and Siena would have quickly yielded, in part
through envy of the Florentines, in part through fear; the
Florentines had no remedy. If he had succeeded in this (as he
was succeeding the same year that Alexander died), he would
62
have acquired such force and reputation that he would have
stood by himself and would no longer have depended on the
fortune and force of someone else, but on his own power
12 and
virtue. But Alexander died five years after he
13 had begun to
draw his sword. He left the duke with only the state of
Romagna consolidated, with all the others in the air, between
two very powerful enemy armies, and sick to death. And there
was such ferocity and such virtue in the duke, and he knew so
well how men have to be won over or lost, and so sound were
the foundations that he had laid in so little time, that if he had
not had these armies on his back or if he had been healthy, he
would have been equal to every difficulty. And that his
foundations were good one may see: Romagna waited for him
for more than a month; in Rome, though he was half-alive, he
remained secure; and although the Baglioni, Vitelli, and Orsini
came to Rome, none followed them against him; if he could not
make pope whomever he wanted, at least it would not be
someone he did not want. But if at the death of Alexander the
duke had been healthy, everything would have been easy for
him. And he told me, on the day that Julius II was created,
14
that
he had thought about what might happen when his father was
dying, and had found a remedy for everything, except that he
never thought that at his death he himself would also be on the
point of dying.
Thus, if I summed up all the actions of the duke, I would not
know how to reproach him; on the contrary, it seems to me he
should be put forward, as I have done, to be imitated by all
those who have risen to empire through fortune and by the
arms of others. For with his great spirit and high intention, he
could not have conducted himself otherwise and the only things
in the way of his plans were the brevity of Alexander’s life and
63
his own sickness. So whoever judges it necessary in his new
principality to secure himself against enemies, to gain friends to
himself, to conquer either by force or by fraud, to make himself
loved and feared by the people, and followed and revered by
the soldiers, to eliminate those who can or might offend
15 you,
to renew old orders through new modes, to be severe and
pleasant, magnanimous and liberal, to eliminate an unfaithful
military, to create a new one, to maintain friendships with kings
and princes so that they must either benefit you with favor or be
hesitant to offend you—can find no fresher examples than the
actions of that man. One could only accuse him in the creation
of Julius as pontiff, in which he made a bad choice; for, as was
said, though he could not make a pope to suit himself, he could
have kept anyone from being pope. And for the papacy he
should never have consented to those cardinals whom he had
offended or who, having become pope, would have to be afraid
of him. For men offend either from fear or for hatred. Those
whom he had offended were, among others, San Piero ad
Vincula, Colonna, San Giorgio, Ascanio;
16 all the others, if they
had become pope, would have had to fear him, except Rouen
and the Spaniards, the latter because of kinship and obligation,
the former for his power, because he was connected to the
kingdom of France.
17 Therefore the duke, before everything else,
should have created a Spaniard pope, and if he could not,
should have consented to Rouen, and not San Piero ad Vincula.
And whoever believes that among great personages new
benefits will make old injuries be forgotten deceives himself.
18
So the duke erred in this choice and it was the cause of his
ultimate ruin.
64
VIII
Of Those Who Have Attained a Principality
through Crimes
But, because one becomes prince from private individual also by
two modes which cannot be altogether attributed either to
fortune or to virtue, I do not think they should be left out,
although one of them can be reasoned about more amply where
republics are treated.
1 These are when one ascends to a
principality by some criminal and nefarious path or when a
private citizen becomes prince of his fatherland by the support
of his fellow citizens. And, to speak of the first mode, it will be
shown with two examples, one ancient, the other modern,
without entering otherwise into the merits of this issue, because
I judge it sufficient, for whoever would find it necessary, to
imitate them.
Agathocles the Sicilian
2 became king of Syracuse not only
from private fortune but from a mean and abject one. Born of a
potter, he always kept to a life of crime at every rank of his
career; nonetheless, his crimes were accompanied with such
virtue of spirit and body that when he turned to the military, he
rose through its ranks to become praetor of Syracuse. After he
was established in that rank, he decided to become prince and to
hold with violence and without obligation to anyone else that
which had been conceded to him by agreement. Having given
intelligence of his plan to Hamilcar the Carthaginian, who was
with his armies fighting in Sicily, one morning he assembled the
65
people and Senate of Syracuse as if he had to decide things
pertinent to the republic. At a signal he had ordered, he had all
the senators and the richest of the people killed by his soldiers.
Once they were dead, he seized and held the principate
3 of that
city without any civil controversy. And although he was
defeated twice by the Carthaginians and in the end besieged,
not only was he able to defend his city but also, leaving part of
his men for defense against the siege, he attacked Africa with
the others. In a short time he freed Syracuse from the siege and
brought the Carthaginians to dire necessity; they were
compelled of necessity to come to an agreement with him, to be
content with the possession of Africa, and to leave Sicily to
Agathocles. Thus, whoever might consider the actions and
virtue of this man will see nothing or little that can be attributed
to fortune. For as was said above, not through anyone’s support
but through the ranks of the military, which he had gained for
himself with a thousand hardships and dangers, he came to the
principate and afterwards he maintained it with many spirited
and dangerous policies. Yet one cannot call it virtue to kill one’s
citizens, betray one’s friends, to be without faith, without mercy,
without religion; these modes can enable one to acquire empire,
but not glory. For, if one considers the virtue of Agathocles in
entering into and escaping from dangers, and the greatness of
his spirit in enduring and overcoming adversities, one does not
see why he has to be judged inferior to any most excellent
captain. Nonetheless, his savage cruelty and inhumanity,
together with his infinite crimes, do not permit him to be
celebrated among the most excellent men. Thus, one cannot
attribute to fortune or to virtue what he achieved without either.
In our times, during the reign of Alexander VI, Liverotto da
Fermo,
4 having been left a fatherless child some years before,
66
was brought up by a maternal uncle of his called Giovanni
Fogliani, and in the first years of his youth he was sent out to
soldier under Paolo Vitelli
5 so that when he was versed in that
discipline, he would attain an excellent rank in the military.
Then when Paolo died, he fought under Vitellozzo, his brother,
and in a very short time, since he was ingenious and dashing in
person and spirit, he became the first man in his military. But as
it appeared to him servile to be at the level of others, he thought
that with the aid of certain citizens of Fermo to whom servitude
was dearer than the liberty of their fatherland, and with support
from the Vitelli, he would seize Fermo. And he wrote to
Giovanni Fogliani that since he had been away from home a few
years, he wanted to come to see him and his city, and in some
part to acknowledge his patrimony; and because he had not
troubled himself for anything but to acquire honor, he wanted
to come in honorable fashion accompanied by a hundred
horsemen of his friends and servants, so that his citizens might
see that he had not spend the time in vain. He begged Giovanni
to please order that he be received honorably by the inhabitants
of Fermo, which would direct honor not only to him but to
Giovanni himself, since Liverotto was his ward. Thereupon
Giovanni did not fail in any proper duty to his nephew; and
when Liverotto had been honorably received by the inhabitants
of Fermo, he was lodged in Giovanni’s house. There, after a few
days had passed, and after he had waited to order secretly what
was necessary for his future crime, he held a most solemn
banquet to which he invited Giovanni Fogliani and all the first
men of Fermo. And when the food and all other entertainments
customary at such banquets had been enjoyed, Liverotto, with
cunning,
6 opened certain grave discussions,
7 speaking of the
greatness of Pope Alexander and of Cesare Borgia, his son, and
67
of their undertakings. While Giovanni and the others were
responding to these discussions, Liverotto at a stroke stood up,
saying that these were things that should be spoken of in a more
secret place; and he withdrew to a room into which Giovanni
and all the other citizens came behind him. No sooner were they
seated than soldiers came out of secret places and killed
Giovanni and all the others. After this homicide, Liverotto
mounted on horse, rode through the town and besieged the
highest magistracy in the palace so that through fear they were
compelled to obey him and to establish a government of which
he was made prince. And since all those who could have hurt
8
him because they were malcontent were dead, he strengthened
himself with new civil and military orders, so that in the period
of one year that he held the principality, he was not only secure
in the city of Fermo but had become fearsome to all his
neighbors. And to overthrow him would have been as difficult
as to overthrow Agathocles if he had not permitted himself to be
deceived by Cesare Borgia when at Sinigaglia, as was said
above, he took the Orsini and the Vitelli. There Liverotto too
was taken, one year after the parricide he committed, and
together with Vitellozzo, who had been his master in his virtues
and crimes, he was strangled.
Someone could question how it happened that Agathocles
and anyone like him, after infinite betrayals and cruelties, could
live for a long time secure in his fatherland, defend himself
against external enemies, and never be conspired against by his
citizens, inasmuch as many others have not been able to
maintain their states through cruelty even in peaceful times, not
to mention uncertain times of war. I believe that this comes from
cruelties badly used or well used. Those can be called well used
(if it is permissible to speak well of evil) that are done at a
68
stroke, out of the necessity to secure oneself, and then are not
persisted in but are turned to as much utility for the subjects as
one can. Those cruelties are badly used which, though few in
the beginning, rather grow with time than are eliminated. Those
who observe the first mode can have some remedy for their
state with God and with men, as had Agathocles; as for the
others it is impossible for them to maintain themselves.
Hence it should be noted that in taking hold of a state, he who
seizes it should review all the offenses necessary for him to
commit, and do them all at a stroke, so as not to have to renew
them every day and, by not renewing them, to secure men and
gain them to himself with benefits. Whoever does otherwise,
either through timidity or through bad counsel, is always under
necessity to hold a knife in his hand; nor can one ever found
himself on his subjects if, because of fresh and continued
injuries, they cannot be secure against him. For injuries must be
done all together, so that, being tasted less, they offend less; and
benefits should be done little by little so that they may be tasted
better.
9 And above all, a prince should live with his subjects so
that no single accident whether bad or good has to make him
change; for when necessities come in adverse times you will not
be in time for evil, and the good that you do does not help you,
because it is judged to be forced on you, and cannot bring you
any gratitude.
69
IX
Of the Civil Principality
But, coming to the other policy, when a private citizen becomes
prince of his fatherland, not through crime or other intolerable
violence but with the support of his fellow citizens (which one
could call a civil principality; neither all virtue nor all fortune is
necessary to attain it, but rather a fortunate astuteness)—I say
that one ascends to this principality either with the support of
the people or with the support of the great. For in every city
these two diverse humors are found, which arises from this: that
the people desire neither to be commanded nor oppressed by
the great, and the great desire to command and oppress the
people. From these two diverse appetites one of three effects
occurs in cities: principality or liberty or license.
Principality is caused either by the people or by the great,
according to which of these sides has the opportunity for it. For
when the great see they cannot resist the people, they begin to
give reputation to one of themselves, and they make him prince
so that they can vent their appetite under his shadow. So too,
the people, when they see they cannot resist the great, give
reputation to one, and make him prince so as to be defended
with his authority. He who comes to the principality with the
aid of the great maintains himself with more difficulty than one
who becomes prince with the aid of the people, because the
former finds himself prince with many around him who appear
to be his equals, and because of this he can neither command
them nor manage them to suit himself. But he who arrives in the
70
principality with popular support finds himself alone there, and
around him has either no one or very few who are not ready to
obey. Besides this, one cannot satisfy the great with decency and
without injury to others, but one can satisfy the people; for the
end of the people is more decent than that of the great, since the
great want to oppress and the people want not to be oppressed.
Furthermore, a prince can never secure himself against a hostile
people, as they are too many; against the great, he can secure
himself, as they are few. The worst that a prince can expect from
a hostile people is to be abandoned by it; but from the great,
when they are hostile, he must fear not only being abandoned
but also that they may come against him, for since there is more
foresight and more astuteness in the great, they always move in
time to save themselves, and they seek rank from those they
hope will win. Also, the prince always lives of necessity with the
same people, but he can well do without the same great persons,
since he can make and unmake them every day, and take away
and give them reputation at his convenience.
And to better clarify this issue, I say that the great must be
considered in two modes chiefly. Either they conduct
themselves so that in their proceedings they are obligated in
everything to your fortune, or not. Those who are obligated, and
are not rapacious, must be honored and loved; those who are
not obligated have to be examined in two modes. Either they do
this out of pusillanimity and a natural defect of spirit; then you
must make use especially of those who are of good counsel,
because in prosperity they bring you honor and in adversity you
do not have to fear them; but, when by art and for an ambitious
cause, they are not obligated, it is a sign that they are thinking
more for themselves than for you; and the prince must be on
guard against them, and fear them as if they were open enemies,
71
because in adversity they will always help ruin him.
Therefore, one who becomes prince through the support of
the people should keep them friendly to him, which should be
easy for him because they ask of him only that they not be
oppressed. But one who becomes prince against the people with
the support of the great must before everything else seek to gain
the people to himself, which should be easy for him when he
takes up its protection. And since men who receive good from
someone from whom they believed they would receive evil are
more obligated to their benefactor, the people immediately wish
him well more than if he had been brought to the principality
with their support. The prince can gain the people to himself in
many modes, for which one cannot give certain rules because
the modes vary according to circumstances,
1 and so they will be
left out. I will conclude only that for a prince it is necessary to
have the people friendly; otherwise he has no remedy in
adversity.
Nabis, prince of the Spartans,
2 withstood a siege by all Greece
and by one of Rome’s most victorious armies, and defended his
fatherland and his state against them: and when danger
supervened it was enough for him to secure himself only
against a few, which would not have been enough if he had had
a hostile people. And let no one resist my opinion on this with
that trite proverb, that whoever founds on the people founds on
mud. For that is true when a private citizen lays his foundation
on them, and allows himself to think that the people will
liberate him if he is oppressed by enemies or by the magistrates
(in this case one can often be deceived, like the Gracchi in Rome
3
and Messer Giorgio Scali in Florence).
4 But when a prince who
founds on the people knows how to command and is a man full
of heart, does not get frightened in adversity, does not fail to
72
make other preparations, and with his spirit and his orders
keeps the generality of people
5
inspired, he will never find
himself deceived by them and he will see he has laid his
foundations well.
These principalities customarily run into peril when they are
about to ascend from a civil order to an absolute one. For these
princes either command by themselves or by means of
magistrates. In the latter case their position is weaker and more
dangerous because they remain altogether at the will of those
citizens who have been put in the magistracies, who, especially
in adverse times, can take away his state with great ease either
by turning against him or by not obeying him. And the prince
does not have time in the midst of danger to seize absolute
authority because the citizens and subjects, who are accustomed
to receive commands from the magistrates, are not ready, in
these emergencies, to obey his; he will always have, in uncertain
times, a shortage of those one can trust. For such a prince cannot
found himself on what he sees in quiet times, when citizens
have need of the state, because then everyone runs, everyone
promises, and each wants to die for him when death is at a
distance; but in adverse times, when the state has need of
citizens, then few of them are to be found. And this test is all the
more dangerous since one cannot make it but once. And so a
wise prince must think of a way by which his citizens, always
and in every quality of time, have need of the state and of
himself; and then they will always be faithful to him.
73
X
In What Mode the Forces of All
Principalities Should Be Measured
In examining the qualities of these principalities one must admit
another consideration; that is, whether a prince has enough of a
state that he can rule by himself when he needs to, or whether
he is always under the necessity of being defended by others.
And, to better clarify this issue, I say that I judge those capable
of ruling by themselves who can, by abundance of either men or
money, put together an adequate army and fight a battle
1
against whoever comes to attack them; and I judge as well that
those always have necessity of others who cannot appear in the
field against an enemy, but are compelled of necessity to take
refuge behind walls and to guard them. The first case has been
discussed, and in what is to come we will say what is required
for it. In the second case one can only exhort such princes to
fortify and supply their own towns,
2 and to take no account of
the countryside. And whoever has fortified his town well, and
has managed the other governing of his subjects as was said
above and will be said below, will be attacked always with great
hesitation; for men are always hostile to undertakings where
difficulties may be seen, and one can see it is not easy to attack
one who has a strong town and is not hated by the people.
The cities of Germany
3 are very free, have little countryside,
and obey the emperor when they want to; they do not fear
either him or any other power around, because they are so well
74
fortified that everyone thinks their capture would be toilsome
and difficult. For all of them have suitable ditches and walls,
and sufficient artillery; they always keep in their public stores
enough to drink and to eat and to burn for a year. Besides this,
so as to keep the plebs fed without loss to the public, they
always keep in common supply enough to be able to give them
work for a year in employments that are the nerve and the life of
that city and of the industries from which the plebs is fed. They
still hold military exercises in repute, and they have many
institutions
4
to maintain them.
Thus a prince who has a strong city and does not make
himself hated cannot be attacked; and if indeed there is someone
who would attack him, he would have to retreat in shame, for
worldly things are so variable that it is next to impossible for
one to stand with his armies idle in a siege for a year. And
someone might reply: if the people have their possessions
outside, and see them burning, they will not have patience for
this, and the long siege and their love
5
for their own will make
them forget the prince. I respond that a powerful and spirited
prince will always overcome all these difficulties, now by giving
hope to his subjects that the evil will not last long, now by
giving them fear of the enemy’s cruelty, now by securing
himself skillfully against those who appear to him too bold.
Besides this, the enemy reasonably would burn and ruin the
countryside on his arrival, at a time when men’s spirits are still
hot and willing for defense; and thus the prince should hesitate
so much the less, because after several days, when spirits have
cooled, the damage has already been done, the evil has been
received, and there is no more remedy for it. At that time they
come to unite with their prince so much the more, since it
appears he has an obligation toward them, their houses having
75
been burned and their possessions ruined in his defense. And
the nature of men is to be obligated as much by benefits they
give as by benefits they receive. Hence, if one considers all this
well, it should not be difficult for a prudent prince to keep the
spirits of his citizens firm in the siege, at first and later, provided
he does not lack the wherewithal for life and for defense.
76
XI
Of Ecclesiastical Principalities
It remains now only to reason about ecclesiastical principalities.
All difficulties regarding them come before they are possessed,
because they are acquired either by virtue or by fortune and are
maintained without the one or the other, for they are sustained
by orders that have grown old with religion, which have been so
powerful and of such a kind that they keep their princes in the
state however they proceed and live. These alone have states,
and do not defend them; they have subjects, and do not govern
them; and the states, though undefended, are not taken from
them; the subjects, though ungoverned, do not care, and they
neither think of becoming estranged from such princes nor can
they. Thus, only these principalities are secure and happy But as
they subsist by superior causes,
1
to which the human mind does
not reach, I will omit speaking of them; for since they are
exalted and maintained by God, it would be the office of a
presumptuous and foolhardy man to discourse on them.
Nonetheless, if someone were to inquire of me how it came
about that the Church has come to such greatness in temporal
affairs despite the fact that, before Alexander, the Italian
powers, and not only those that are called powers but every
baron and lord, even the least, held her in low esteem in
temporal affairs—and now a king of France trembles at her and
she has been able to remove him from Italy and to ruin the
Venetians—though this is known, it does not seem to me
77
superfluous to recall a good part of it to memory.
Before Charles, king of France, came into Italy,
2
this province
was under the power of the pope, the Venetians, the king of
Naples, the duke of Milan, and the Florentines. These powers
had to have two principal concerns: one, that a foreigner not
enter into Italy with arms; the other, that none of them enlarge
his state. Those who concerned them the most were the pope
and the Venetians. And to hold back the Venetians the union of
all the others was needed, as in the defense of Ferrara; to hold
down the pope they made use of the barons in Rome. Since
these were divided into two factions, Orsini and Colonna, there
was always cause for quarrel
3 between them; and standing with
arms in hand under the eyes of the pontiff, they kept the
pontificate weak and infirm. And although a spirited pope, like
Sixtus,
4 sometimes rose up, still fortune or wisdom could never
release him from these inconveniences. And the brevity of their
lives was the cause of it; for in the ten years on the average that
a pope lived, he would have trouble putting down one of the
factions.
5
If, for instance, one pope had almost eliminated the
Colonna, another one hostile to the Orsini rose up, which made
the Colonna rise again, and there would not be time to eliminate
the Orsini.
This brought the temporal forces of the pope to be held in low
esteem in Italy. Then Alexander VI arose;
6 of all the pontiffs
there have ever been he showed how far a pope could prevail
with money and forces. With Duke Valentino as his instrument
and with the invasion of the French as the opportunity, he did
all the things I discussed above in the actions of the duke. And
though his intent might not have been to make the Church
great, but rather the duke, nonetheless what he did redounded
to the greatness of the Church. After his death, the duke being
78
eliminated, the Church fell heir to his labors. Then came Pope
Julius, and he found the Church great, since she had all
Romagna, had eliminated the barons in Rome, and had
annihilated those factions through the blows struck by
Alexander; Julius found the path still open to a mode of
accumulating money, never used before Alexander.
7 These
things Julius not only continued but increased; and he thought
about how to gain Bologna for himself, eliminate the Venetians,
and expel the French from Italy. All these enterprises succeeded
for him, and with all the more praise, inasmuch as he did
everything for the increase of the Church and not of some
private individual. He also kept the Orsini and Colonna parties
within the same limits in which he found them; and although
there might be some head among them ready to make a change,
still two things restrained them: one, the greatness of the
Church, which frightened them; the other, not having cardinals
of their own, for they are the origin of the tumults among them.
Nor will these parties ever be quiet as long as they have
cardinals; for cardinals nourish parties, within Rome and
without, and the barons are forced to defend them. Thus, from
the ambition of prelates arise disorders and tumults among the
barons. His Holiness Pope Leo,
8
then, has found this pontificate
most powerful; one may hope that if the others made it great
with arms, he, with his goodness and infinite other virtues, can
make it very great and venerable.
79
XII
How Many Kinds of Military There Are and
Concerning Mercenary Soldiers
Having discoursed in particular on all the qualities of those
principalities which at the beginning I proposed to reason
about, having considered in some part the causes of their wellbeing and ill-being, and having shown the modes in which
many have sought to acquire and hold them, it remains for me
now to discourse generally on the offense and defense befitting
each of those named. We have said above that it is necessary for
a prince to have good foundations for himself;
1 otherwise he
must of necessity be ruined. The principal foundations that all
states have, new ones as well as old or mixed, are good laws and
good arms. And because there cannot be good laws where there
are not good arms, and where there are good arms there must
be good laws, I shall leave out the reasoning on laws and shall
speak of arms.
I say, therefore, that the arms with which a prince defends his
state are either his own or mercenary or auxiliary or mixed.
Mercenary and auxiliary arms are useless and dangerous; and if
one keeps his state founded on mercenary arms, one will never
be firm or secure; for they are disunited, ambitious, without
discipline, unfaithful; bold among friends, among enemies
cowardly; no fear of God, no faith with men; ruin is postponed
only as long as attack is postponed; and in peace you are
despoiled by them, in war by the enemy. The cause of this is
80
that they have no love nor cause to keep them in the field other
than a small stipend, which is not sufficient to make them want
to die for you. They do indeed want to be your soldiers
2 while
you are not making war, but when war comes, they either flee
or leave. It should be little trouble for me to persuade anyone of
this point, because the present ruin of Italy is caused by nothing
other than its having relied for a period of many years on
mercenary arms. These arms once made some progress for
some, and may have appeared bold among themselves; but
when the foreigner came, they showed what they were. Hence
Charles, king of France, was allowed to seize Italy with chalk.
3
And he who said that our sins were the cause of it spoke the
truth.
4 But the sins were surely not those he believed, but the
ones I have told of, and because these were the sins of princes,
they too have suffered the punishment for them.
I want to demonstrate better the failure of these arms.
Mercenary captains are either excellent men of arms or not: if
they are, you cannot trust them because they always aspire to
their own greatness, either by oppressing you, who are their
patron, or by oppressing others contrary to your intention; but if
the captain is not virtuous, he ruins you in the ordinary way.
And if one responds that whoever has arms in hand will do this,
mercenary or not, I would reply that arms have to be employed
either by a prince or by a republic. The prince should go in
person, and perform himself the office of captain. The republic
has to send its citizens, and when it sends one who does not
turn out to be a worthy man, it must change him; and if he is, it
must check him with laws so that he does not step out of
bounds. And by experience one sees that only princes and
armed republics make very great progress; nothing but harm
ever comes from mercenary arms. And a republic armed with
81
its own arms is brought to obey one of its citizens with more
difficulty than is a republic armed with foreign
5 arms.
Rome and Sparta stood for many centuries armed and free.
The Swiss are very well armed and very free. The Carthaginians
are an example of ancient mercenary arms; they were nearly
oppressed by their own mercenary soldiers at the end of the first
war with the Romans, even though the Carthaginians had their
own citizens as heads.
6 After the death of Epaminondas, Philip
of Macedon was made captain of their troops by the Thebans;
and after his victory he took their liberty from them.
7 The
Milanese, after Duke Filippo died, hired Francesco Sforza
against the Venetians; when he had overcome the enemy at
Caravaggio, he joined with them to oppress the Milanese, his
patrons.
8 Sforza’s father, in the hire of Queen Giovanna of
Naples, at a stroke left her disarmed; then, so as not to lose the
kingdom, she was compelled to throw herself in the lap of the
king of Aragon.
9 And, if the Venetians and the Florentines have
in the past increased their empire with these arms, and their
captains did not thereupon make themselves princes but
defended them, I respond that the Florentines were favored by
chance in this case, because, of the virtuous captains whom they
could have feared, some did not win, some had opposition,
others turned their ambition elsewhere. The one who did not
win was Giovanni Acuto.
10 Since he did not win, one could not
know his faith, but everyone will confess that if he had won, the
Florentines would have been at his discretion. Sforza always
had the Bracceschi
11 against him, so that each watched the other:
Francesco turned his ambition to Lombardy, Braccio against the
Church and the kingdom of Naples.
But let us come to what happened a little while ago. The
Florentines took as their captain Paolo Vitelli, a most prudent
82
man who from private fortune had secured very great
reputation. If he had captured Pisa, no one would deny that the
Florentines would have had to stay with him, because if he had
gone over in hire to their enemies, they would have had no
remedy; and if they had kept him, they would have had to obey
him. If one considers the progress of the Venetians, one will see
that they acted securely and gloriously while they themselves
made war (which was before they turned to enterprises on
land). With their own gentry and armed plebs, they performed
most virtuously, but when they began to fight on land, they left
this virtue behind and they followed the customs of wars in
Italy. And at the beginning of their expansion on land, because
they did not have much of a state there and because they were
held in great repute, they did not have much to fear from their
captains; but as they expanded, which was under Carmagnola,
12
they suffered an instance of this error. For when they saw he
was most virtuous, since the duke of Milan had been defeated
by them under his government, and when they learned on the
other hand that he had turned cool toward the war, they judged
they could no longer win with him because he did not want to,
nor could they dismiss him without losing what they had
acquired. So in order to secure themselves, they were forced of
necessity to kill him. Then they had as their captains Bartolomeo
da Bergamo, Roberto da San Severino, the count of Pitigliano,
13
and such. With these they had to fear for loss, not for their gain,
as then happened at Vailà: there they lost in one day what they
had acquired with such trouble in eight hundred years. For
these arms bring only slow, late, and weak acquisitions, but
sudden and miraculous losses. And because with these
examples I have come into Italy, which has been governed for
many years by mercenary arms, I want to discourse on them
83
more deeply, so that, when their origin and progress have been
seen, one can correct them better.
So you
14 have to understand that in recent times as soon as
Italy began to repel the empire, and the pope gained much
reputation in temporal affairs, Italy divided into many states.
For many of the large cities took up arms against their nobles,
who formerly, supported by the emperor, had kept them under
oppression; and the Church supported the cities to give herself
reputation in temporal affairs. In many other cities their citizens
became princes over them. Hence, since Italy had almost fallen
into the hands of the Church and a few republics, and since the
priests and the other citizens did not have knowledge of arms,
they began to hire foreigners. The first who gave reputation to
this kind of military was Alberigo da Conio, from Romagna.
15
From his discipline came, among others, Braccio and Sforza,
who in their times were the arbiters of Italy. After them came all
the others who have governed these arms until our times. And
the result of their virtue has been that Italy has been overrun by
Charles, taken as booty by Louis, violated by Ferdinand, and
insulted by the Swiss. The order they have held to has been,
first, to take away reputation from the infantry in order to give
reputation to themselves. They did this because they were men
without a state who lived on industry. Having a few infantry
did not give them reputation and they could not feed very
many; so they were left with horse, and were fed and honored
in tolerable number. And things came to the point that in an
army of twenty thousand soldiers not two thousand infantry
were to be found. Besides this, they had used all their industry
to rid themselves and the soldiers of trouble and fear by not
killing one another in battles but taking prisoners without
asking ransom. They did not go against towns in the night;
84
those in the towns would not go against their tents; around the
camp they made neither stockade nor trench; they did not
campaign in winter. And all these things were permitted in their
military orders and discovered by them, as has been said, so as
to escape trouble and dangers, so that they have led
16
Italy into
slavery and disgrace.
85
XIII
Of Auxiliary, Mixed, and One’s Own
Soldiers
Auxiliary arms, which are the other useless arms, are those of a
power that is called to come with its arms to help and defend
you, as was done by Pope Julius in recent times. When he had
seen in the campaign of Ferrara the sad result of his mercenary
arms, he turned to auxiliary ones; and he agreed with
Ferdinand, king of Spain, that Ferdinand would help him with
his men and armies. These arms can be useful and good in
themselves, but for whoever calls them in, they are almost
always harmful, because when they lose you are undone; when
they win, you are left their prisoner. And although ancient
histories are full of examples, nonetheless I do not wish to
depart from this recent example of Pope Julius II, whose course
of thrusting himself entirely into the hands of a foreigner, when
he wanted Ferrara, could not have been less thought out. But his
good fortune gave rise to a third thing so that he did not reap
the fruit of his bad choice; for when his auxiliaries were
defeated at Ravenna,
1
the Swiss rose up and, beyond all
expectation, his own and others, drove out the victors; and he
came out a prisoner neither of his enemies, who had fled, nor of
his auxiliaries, since he had won with other arms than theirs.
The Florentines, who were entirely unarmed, brought in ten
thousand French to Pisa to capture it,
2
for which course they
incurred more danger than in any other time of their travails.
86
The emperor of Constantinople, so as to oppose his neighbors,
sent ten thousand Turks into Greece; when the war was
finished, they refused to leave.
3 This was the beginning of the
servitude of Greece under the infidels.
Let him, then, who wants to be unable to win make use of
these arms, since they are much more dangerous than
mercenary arms. For with these, ruin is accomplished; they are
all united, all resolved to obey someone else. But mercenary
arms, when they have won, need more time and greater
opportunity to hurt you, since they are not one whole body and
have been found and paid for by you. In them the third party
whom you may put at their head cannot quickly seize so much
authority as to offend you. In sum, in mercenary arms laziness
is more dangerous; in auxiliary arms, virtue is.
A wise prince, therefore, has always avoided these arms and
turned to his own. He has preferred to lose with his own than to
win with others, since he judges it no true victory that is
acquired with alien arms. I shall never hesitate to cite Cesare
Borgia and his actions. This duke came into Romagna with
auxiliary arms, leading there entirely French troops, with whom
he took Imola and Forlì. But when such arms no longer
appeared safe to him, he turned to mercenaries, judging there to
be less danger in them; and he hired the Orsini and Vitelli. Then
in managing them, he found them doubtful, unfaithful, and
dangerous; he eliminated them, and turned to his own arms.
And one can easily see the difference between these arms if one
considers what a difference there was in the reputation of the
duke when he had only the French, and when he had the Orsini
and Vitelli, and when he was left with his own soldiers and
himself over them: his reputation will be found always to have
increased, but he was never so much esteemed as when
87
everyone saw that he was the total owner of his arms.
I did not want to depart from examples that are Italian and
recent; yet I do not want to leave out Hiero of Syracuse, since he
was one of those named above by me.
4 When he, as I said, was
made head of the army by the Syracusans, he knew immediately
that their mercenary military was not useful because they were
condottieri set up like our Italians. Since he thought he could
neither keep them nor let them go, he had them all cut to pieces,
and then made war with his arms and not with alien arms. I
want further to recall to memory a figure of the Old Testament
apt for this purpose. When David offered to Saul to go and fight
Goliath, the Philistine challenger, Saul, to give him spirit, armed
him with his own arms—which David, as soon as he had them
on, refused, saying that with them he could not give a good
account of himself, and so he would rather meet the enemy with
his sling and his knife.
5
In fine, the arms of others either fall off your back or weigh
you down or hold you tight. Charles VII, father of King Louis
XI, who had liberated France from the English with his fortune
and virtue, recognized this necessity of arming himself with his
own arms, and laid down
6 an ordinance in his kingdom for
men-at-arms and infantry. Then his son King Louis eliminated
the ordinance for infantry and began to hire Swiss; this error,
continued by others, is, as one sees now in fact, the cause of the
dangers to that kingdom. For when he gave reputation to the
Swiss, he debased all his own arms, because he had eliminated
the infantry entirely and he had obligated his men-at-arms to
the arms of others. For after they had become accustomed to
fighting with Swiss, they did not think they could win without
them. From this it follows that French are not enough against
Swiss and without Swiss do not try against anyone else. Thus,
88
the armies of France have been mixed, part mercenary and part
their own. These arms all together are much better than simple
auxiliary or simple mercenary arms, but much inferior to one’s
own. And the example given is enough, because the kingdom of
France would be unconquerable if the ordering of Charles had
been expanded or preserved. But lack of prudence in men
begins something in which, because it tastes good then, they do
not perceive the poison that lies underneath, as I said above of
consumptive fevers.
7
Therefore, he who does not recognize evils when they arise in
a principality is not truly wise, and this is given to few. And if
one considers the first cause of the ruin of the Roman Empire,
one will find it to have begun only with the hiring of Goths,
because from that beginning the forces of the Roman Empire
began to weaken, and all the virtue that was taken from it was
given to them.
I conclude, thus, that without its own arms no principality is
secure; indeed it is wholly obliged to fortune since it does not
have virtue to defend itself
8
in adversity. And it has always been
the opinion and judgment of wise men “that nothing is so infirm
and unstable as fame for power not sustained by one’s own
force.”
9 And one’s own arms are those which are composed of
either subjects or citizens or your creatures: all others are either
mercenary or auxiliary. And the mode of ordering one’s own
arms will be easy to find if one reviews
10
the orders of the four I
have named above
11 and if one sees how Philip, father of
Alexander the Great, and how many republics and princes have
armed and ordered themselves. I submit myself entirely to these
orders.
89
XIV
What a Prince Should Do Regarding the
Military
Thus, a prince should have no other object, nor any other
thought, nor take anything else as his art but that of war and its
orders and discipline; for that is the only art which is of concern
to one who commands. And it is of such virtue that not only
does it maintain those who have been born princes but many
times it enables men of private fortune to rise to that rank; and
on the contrary, one sees that when princes have thought more
of amenities than of arms, they have lost their states. And the
first cause that makes you lose it is the neglect of this art; and
the cause that enables you to acquire it is to be a professional in
this art.
Francesco Sforza, because he was armed, became duke of
Milan from a private individual; and his sons, because they
shunned the hardships of arms, became private individuals
from dukes.
1 For, among the other causes of evil that being
unarmed brings you, it makes you contemptible, which is one of
those infamies the prince should be on guard against, as will be
said below. For there is no proportion between one who is
armed and one who is unarmed, and it is not reasonable that
whoever is armed obey willingly whoever is unarmed, and that
someone unarmed be secure among armed servants. For since
there is scorn in the one and suspicion in the other, it is not
possible for them to work well together. And therefore a prince
90
who does not understand the military, besides other
unhappiness, cannot, as was said, be esteemed by his soldiers
nor have trust in them.
Therefore, he should never lift his thoughts from the exercise
of war, and in peace he should exercise it more than in war. This
he can do in two modes, one with deeds, the other with the
mind. And as to deeds, besides keeping his armies well ordered
and exercised, he should always be out hunting, and through
this accustom the body to hardships; and meanwhile he should
learn the nature of sites, and recognize how mountains rise, how
valleys open up, how plains lie, and understand the nature of
rivers and marshes—and in this invest the greatest care. This
knowledge is useful in two modes. First, one learns to know
one’s own country, and one can better understand its defense;
then, through the knowledge of and experience with those sites,
one can comprehend with ease every other site that it may be
necessary to explore
2 as new. For the hills, the valleys, the
plains, the rivers, and the marshes that are in Tuscany, for
example, have a certain similarity to those of other provinces, so
that from the knowledge of a site in one province one can easily
come to the knowledge of others. And the prince who lacks this
skill lacks the first part of what a captain must have, for this
teaches him to find the enemy, seize lodgings, lead armies,
order battles, and besiege towns to your advantage.
3
Among other praise given by writers to Philopoemen, prince
of the Achaeans,
4
is that in times of peace he never thought of
anything but modes of war; and when he was on campaign with
friends, he often stopped and reasoned with them: “If the enemy
were on top of that hill and we were here with our army, which
of us would have the advantage? How could one advance to
meet them while maintaining order? If we wanted to retreat
91
from here, how would we have to do it? If they retreated, how
would we have to follow them?” And he put before them, as he
went along, all the chances that can occur to an army; he
listened to their opinions, gave his own, supported it with
reasons, so that because of these continued cogitations there
could never arise, while he led the army, any accident for which
he did not have the remedy.
But, as to the exercise of the mind, a prince should read
histories and consider in them the actions of excellent men,
should see how they conducted themselves in wars, should
examine the causes of their victories and losses, so as to be able
to avoid the latter and imitate the former. Above all he should
do as some excellent man has done in the past who found
someone to imitate who had been praised and glorified before
him, whose exploits and actions he always kept beside himself,
as they say Alexander the Great imitated Achilles; Caesar,
Alexander; Scipio, Cyrus. And whoever reads the life of Cyrus
written by Xenophon
5 will then recognize in the life of Scipio
how much glory that imitation brought him, how much in
chastity, affability, humanity, and liberality Scipio conformed to
what had been written of Cyrus by Xenophon.
A wise prince should observe such modes, and never remain
idle in peaceful times, but with his industry make capital of
them in order to be able to profit from them in adversities, so
that when fortune changes, it will find him ready to resist them.
92
XV
Of Those Things for Which Men And
Especially Princes Are Praised or Blamed
It remains now to see what the modes and government of a
prince should be with subjects and with friends. And because I
know that many have written of this, I fear that in writing of it
again, I may be held presumptuous, especially since in
disputing this matter I depart from the orders of others. But
since my intent is to write something useful to whoever
understands it, it has appeared to me more fitting to go directly
to the effectual truth of the thing than to the imagination of it.
And many have imagined republics and principalities that have
never been seen or known to exist in truth; for it is so far from
how one lives to how one should live that he who lets go of
what is done for what should be done learns his ruin rather than
his preservation. For a man who wants to make a profession of
good in all regards must come to ruin among so many who are
not good. Hence it is necessary to a prince, if he wants to
maintain himself, to learn to be able not to be good, and to use
this and not use it according to necessity.
Thus, leaving out what is imagined about a prince and
discussing what is true, I say that all men, whenever one speaks
of them, and especially princes, since they are placed higher, are
noted for some of the qualities that bring them either blame or
praise. And this is why someone is considered liberal, someone
mean (using a Tuscan term because avaro [avaricious] in our
93
language is still one who desires to have something by rapine,
misero [mean] we call one who refrains too much from using
what is his); someone is considered a giver, someone rapacious;
someone cruel, someone merciful;
1
the one a breaker of faith, the
other faithful; the one effeminate and pusillanimous, the other
fierce and spirited; the one humane, the other proud; the one
lascivious, the other chaste; the one honest, the other astute; the
one hard, the other agreeable;
2
the one grave, the other light; the
one religious, the other unbelieving, and the like. And I know
that everyone will confess that it would be a very praiseworthy
thing to find in a prince all of the above-mentioned qualities that
are held good. But because he cannot have them, nor wholly
3
observe them, since human conditions do not permit it, it is
necessary for him to be so prudent as to know how to avoid the
infamy of those vices that would take his state from him and to
be on guard against those that do not, if that is possible; but if
one cannot, one can let them go on with less hesitation. And
furthermore one should not care about incurring the fame
4 of
those vices without which it is difficult to save one’s state; for if
one considers everything well, one will find something appears
to be virtue, which if pursued would be one’s ruin, and
something else appears to be vice, which if pursued results in
one’s security and well-being.
94
XVI
Of Liberality and Parsimony
Beginning, then, with the first of the above-mentioned qualities,
I say that it would be good to be held liberal; nonetheless,
liberality, when used so that you may be held liberal, hurts
1
you. For if it is used virtuously and as it should be used, it may
not be recognized, and you will not escape the infamy of its
contrary. And so, if one wants to maintain a name for liberality
among men, it is necessary not to leave out any kind of lavish
display, so that a prince who has done this will always consume
all his resources in such deeds. In the end it will be necessary, if
he wants to maintain a name for liberality, to burden the people
extraordinarily, to be rigorous with taxes, and to do all those
things that can be done to get money. This will begin to make
him hated by his subjects, and little esteemed by anyone as he
becomes poor; so having offended the many and rewarded the
few with this liberality of his, he feels every least hardship and
runs into risk at every slight danger. When he recognizes this,
and wants to draw back from it, he immediately incurs the
infamy of meanness.
Thus, since a prince cannot, without damage to himself, use
the virtue of liberality so that it is recognized, he should not, if
he is prudent, care about a name for meanness. For with time he
will always be held more and more liberal when it is seen that
with his parsimony his income is enough for him, that he can
defend himself from whoever makes war on him, and that he
95
can undertake campaigns without burdening the people. So he
comes to use liberality with all those from whom he does not
take, who are infinite, and meanness with all those to whom he
does not give, who are few. In our times we have not seen great
things done except by those who have been considered mean;
the others have been eliminated. Pope Julius II, while he made
use of a name for liberality to attain the papacy, did not think of
maintaining it later, so as to be able to make war. The present
king of France
2 has carried on many wars without imposing an
extraordinary tax on his subjects, only because the extra
expenses were administered with his long-practiced parsimony.
If the present king of Spain
3 had been held liberal, he would not
have been able to make or win so many campaigns.
Therefore, so as not to have to rob his subjects, to be able to
defend himself, not to become poor and contemptible, nor to be
forced to become rapacious, a prince should esteem it little to
incur a name for meanness, because this is one of those vices
which enable him to rule. And if someone should say: Caesar
attained empire with liberality, and many others, because they
have been and have been held to be liberal, have attained very
great rank, I respond: either you are already a prince or you are
on the path to acquiring it: in the first case this liberality is
damaging; in the second it is indeed necessary to be held liberal.
And Caesar was one of those who wanted to attain the
principate of Rome; but if after he had arrived there, had he
remained alive and not been temperate with his expenses, he
would have destroyed that empire. And if someone should
reply: many have been princes and have done great things with
their armies who have been held very liberal, I respond to you:
either the prince spends from what is his own and his subjects’
or from what belongs to someone else. In the first case he should
96
be sparing; in the other, he should not leave out any part of
liberality. And for the prince who goes out with his armies, who
feeds on booty, pillage, and ransom and manages on what
belongs to someone else, this liberality is necessary; otherwise
he would not be followed by his soldiers. And of what is not
yours or your subjects’ one can be a bigger giver, as were Cyrus,
Caesar, and Alexander, because spending what is someone
else’s does not take reputation from you but adds it to you; only
spending your own is what harms you. And there is nothing
that consumes itself as much as liberality: while you use it, you
lose the capacity to use it; and you become either poor and
contemptible or, to escape poverty, rapacious and hateful.
Among all the things that a prince should guard against is being
contemptible and hated, and liberality leads you to both. So
there is more wisdom in maintaining a name for meanness,
which begets infamy without hatred, than in being under a
necessity, because one wants to have a name for liberality, to
incur a name for rapacity, which begets infamy with hatred.
97
XVII
Of Cruelty and Mercy,
1 and Whether It Is
Better to Be Loved Than Feared, or the
Contrary
Descending next to the other qualities cited before, I say that
each prince should desire to be held merciful and not cruel;
nonetheless he should take care not to use this mercy badly.
Cesare Borgia was held to be cruel; nonetheless his cruelty
restored the Romagna, united it, and reduced it to peace and to
faith. If one considers this well, one will see that he was much
more merciful than the Florentine people, who so as to escape a
name for cruelty, allowed Pistoia to be destroyed.
2 A prince,
therefore, so as to keep his subjects united and faithful, should
not care about the infamy of cruelty, because with very few
examples he will be more merciful than those who for the sake
of too much mercy allow disorders to continue, from which
come killings or robberies; for these customarily hurt
3 a whole
community,
4 but the executions that come from the prince hurt
5
one particular person. And of all princes, it is impossible for the
new prince to escape a name for cruelty because new states are
full of dangers. And Virgil says in the mouth of Dido: “The
harshness of things and the newness of the kingdom compel me
to contrive such things, and to keep a broad watch over the
borders.”
6
Nonetheless, he should be slow to believe and to move, nor
should he make himself feared, and he should proceed in a
98
temperate mode with prudence and humanity so that too much
confidence does not make him incautious and too much
diffidence does not render him intolerable.
From this a dispute arises whether it is better to be loved than
feared, or the reverse. The response is that one would want to be
both the one and the other; but because it is difficult to put them
together, it is much safer to be feared than loved, if one has to
lack one of the two. For one can say this generally of men: that
they are ungrateful, fickle, pretenders and dissemblers, evaders
of danger, eager for gain. While you do them good, they are
yours, offering you their blood, property, lives, and children, as
I said above,
7 when the need for them is far away; but, when it
is close to you, they revolt. And that prince who has founded
himself entirely on their words, stripped of other preparation, is
ruined; for friendships that are acquired at a price and not with
greatness and nobility of spirit are bought, but they are not
owned and when the time comes they cannot be spent. And
men have less hesitation to offend one who makes himself loved
than one who makes himself feared; for love is held by a chain
of obligation, which, because men are wicked, is broken at every
opportunity for their own utility, but fear is held by a dread of
punishment that never forsakes you.
The prince should nonetheless make himself feared in such a
mode that if he does not acquire love, he escapes hatred,
because being feared and not being hated can go together very
well. This he will always do if he abstains from the property of
his citizens and his subjects, and from their women; and if he
also needs to proceed against someone’s life,
8 he must do it
when there is suitable justification and manifest cause for it. But
above all, he must abstain from the property of others, because
men forget the death of a father more quickly than the loss of a
99
patrimony. Furthermore, causes for taking away property are
never lacking, and he who begins to live by rapine always finds
cause to seize others’ property; and, on the contrary, causes for
taking life
9 are rarer and disappear more quickly.
But when the prince is with his armies and has a multitude of
soldiers under his government, then it is above all necessary not
to care about a name for cruelty, because without this name he
never holds his army united, or disposed to any action. Among
the admirable actions of Hannibal is numbered this one: that
when he had a very large army, mixed with infinite kinds of
men, and had led it to fight in alien lands, no dissension ever
arose in it, neither among themselves nor against the prince, in
bad as well as in his good fortune. This could not have arisen
from anything other than his inhuman cruelty which, together
with his infinite virtues, always made him venerable and
terrible in the sight of his soldiers; and without it, his other
virtues would not have sufficed to bring about this effect. And
the writers, having considered little in this, on the one hand
admire this action of his but on the other condemn the principal
cause of it.
And to see that it is true that his other virtues would not have
been enough, one can consider Scipio, who was very rare not
only in his times but also in the entire memory of things known
—whose armies in Spain rebelled against him. This arose from
nothing but his excessive mercy, which had allowed his soldiers
more license than is fitting for military discipline. Scipio’s mercy
was reproved in the Senate by Fabius Maximus, who called him
the corruptor of the Roman military. After the Locrians had
been destroyed by a legate of Scipio’s, they were not avenged by
him, nor was the insolence of that legate corrected—all of which
arose from his agreeable nature, so that when someone in the
100
Senate wanted to excuse him, he said that there were many men
who knew better how not to err than how to correct errors. Such
a nature would in time have sullied Scipio’s fame and glory if he
had continued with it in the empire; but while he lived under
the government of the Senate, this damaging quality of his not
only was hidden, but made for his glory.
10
I conclude, then, returning to being feared and loved, that
since men love at their convenience and fear at the convenience
of the prince, a wise prince should found himself on what is his,
not on what is someone else’s; he should only contrive to avoid
hatred, as was said.
101
XVIII
In What Mode Faith Should Be Kept by
Princes
How praiseworthy it is for a prince to keep his faith, and to live
with honesty and not by astuteness, everyone understands.
Nonetheless one sees by experience in our times that the princes
who have done great things are those who have taken little
account of faith and have known how to get around men’s
brains with their astuteness; and in the end they have overcome
those who have founded themselves on loyalty.
Thus, you
1 must know that there are two kinds of combat: one
with laws, the other with force. The first is proper to man, the
second to beasts; but because the first is often not enough, one
must have recourse to the second. Therefore it is necessary for a
prince to know well how to use the beast and the man. This role
was taught covertly to princes by ancient writers, who wrote
that Achilles, and many other ancient princes, were given to
Chiron the centaur to be raised, so that he would look after them
with his discipline. To have as teacher a half-beast, half-man
means nothing other than that a prince needs to know how to
use both natures; and the one without the other is not lasting.
Thus, since a prince is compelled of necessity to know well
how to use the beast, he should pick the fox and the lion,
2
because the lion does not defend itself from snares and the fox
does not defend itself from wolves. So one needs to be a fox to
recognize snares and a lion to frighten the wolves. Those who
102
stay simply with the lion do not understand this. A prudent
lord, therefore, cannot observe faith, nor should he, when such
observance turns against him, and the causes that made him
promise have been eliminated. And if all men were good, this
teaching would not be good; but because they are wicked and
do not observe faith with you, you also do not have to observe it
with them. Nor does a prince ever lack legitimate causes to color
his failure to observe faith. One could give infinite modern
examples of this, and show how many peace treaties and
promises have been rendered invalid and vain through the
infidelity of princes; and the one who has known best how to
use the fox has come out best. But it is necessary to know well
how to color this nature, and to be a great pretender and
dissembler; and men are so simple and so obedient to present
necessities that he who deceives will always find someone who
will let himself be deceived.
I do not want to be silent about one of the recent examples.
Alexander VI never did anything, nor ever thought of anything,
but how to deceive men, and he always found a subject to
whom he could do it. And there never was a man with greater
efficacy in asserting a thing, and in affirming it with greater
oaths, who observed it less; nonetheless, his deceits succeeded at
his will, because he well knew this aspect of the world.
Thus, it is not necessary for a prince to have all the abovementioned qualities in fact, but it is indeed necessary to appear
to have them. Nay, I dare say this, that by having them and
always observing them, they are harmful; and by appearing to
have them, they are useful, as it is to appear merciful, faithful,
humane, honest, and religious, and to be so; but to remain with
a spirit built so that, if you need not to be those things, you are
able and know how to change to the contrary. This has to be
103
understood: that a prince, and especially a new prince, cannot
observe all those things for which men are held good, since he is
often under a necessity, to maintain his state, of acting against
faith, against charity, against humanity, against religion. And so
he needs to have a spirit disposed to change as the winds of
fortune and variations of things command him, and as I said
above, not depart from good, when possible, but know how to
enter into evil, when forced by necessity.
A prince should thus take great care that nothing escape his
mouth that is not full of the above-mentioned five qualities and
that, to see him and hear him, he should appear all mercy, all
faith, all honesty, all humanity, all religion. And nothing is more
necessary to appear to have than this last quality. Men in
general
3
judge more by their eyes than by their hands, because
seeing is given
4
to everyone, touching to few. Everyone sees
how you appear, few touch what you are; and these few dare
not oppose the opinion of many, who have the majesty of the
state to defend them; and in the actions of all men, and
especially of princes, where there is no court to appeal to, one
looks to the end. So let a prince win and maintain his state: the
means will always be judged honorable, and will be praised by
everyone. For the vulgar are taken in by the appearance and the
outcome of a thing, and in the world there is no one but the
vulgar; the few have a place there
5 when the many have
somewhere to lean on. A certain prince of present times, whom
it is not well to name,
6 never preaches anything but peace and
faith, and is very hostile to both. If he had observed both, he
would have had either his reputation or his state taken from
him many times.
104
XIX
Of Avoiding Contempt and Hatred
But because I have spoken of the most important of the qualities
mentioned above, I want to discourse on the others briefly
under this generality, that the prince, as was said above in part,
should think how to avoid those things that make him hateful
and contemptible. When he avoids them, he will have done his
part and will find no danger in his other infamies. What makes
him hated above all, as I said,
1
is to be rapacious and a usurper
of the property and the women of his subjects. From these he
must abstain, and whenever one does not take away either
property or honor from the generality
2 of men, they live content
and one has only to combat the ambition of the few which may
be checked in many modes and with ease. What makes him
contemptible is to be held variable, light, effeminate,
pusillanimous, irresolute, from which a prince should guard
himself as from a shoal. He should contrive that greatness,
spiritedness, gravity, and strength are recognized in his actions,
and he should insist that his judgments in the private concerns
of his subjects be irrevocable. And he should maintain such an
opinion of himself that no one thinks either of deceiving him or
of getting around him.
The prince who gives this opinion of himself is highly
reputed, and against whoever is reputed it is difficult to
conspire, difficult to mount an attack, provided it is understood
that he is excellent and revered by his own subjects. For a prince
105
should have two fears: one within, on account of his subjects;
the other outside, on account of external powers. From the latter
one is defended with good arms and good friends; and if one
has good arms, one will always have good friends. And things
inside will always remain steady, if things outside are steady,
unless indeed they are disturbed by a conspiracy; and even if
things outside are in motion, provided he has ordered and lived
as I said, as long as he does not forsake himself he will always
withstand every thrust, as I said Nabis the Spartan did.
3 But, as
to subjects, when things outside are not moving, one has to fear
that they may be conspiring secretly. From this the prince may
secure himself sufficiently if he avoids being hated or despised
and keeps the people satisfied with him; this is necessary to
achieve, as was said above at length.
4 And one of the most
powerful remedies that a prince has against conspiracies is not
to be hated by the people generally.
5 For whoever conspires
always believes he will satisfy the people with the death of the
prince, but when he believes he will offend them, he does not
get up the spirit to adopt such a course, because the difficulties
on the side of the conspirators are infinite. And one sees from
experience that there have been many conspiracies, but few
have had a good end. For whoever conspires cannot be alone,
but he cannot find company except from those he believes to be
malcontents; and as soon as you disclose your intent to a
malcontent, you give him the matter with which to become
content, because manifestly he can hope for every advantage
from it. So, seeing sure gain on this side, and on the other,
dubious gain full of danger, he must indeed either be a rare
friend, or an altogether obstinate enemy of the prince, to observe
his faith with you. And to reduce this to brief terms, I say that
on the part of the conspirator there is nothing but fear, jealousy,
106
and the anticipation of terrifying punishment; but on the part of
the prince there is the majesty of the principality, the laws, the
protection of friends and of the state which defend him, so that
when popular good will is added to all these things, it is
impossible that anyone should be so rash as to conspire. For
whereas a conspirator ordinarily has to fear before the execution
of the evil, in this case (having the people as enemies) he must
fear afterwards too, when the excess has occurred, nor can he
hope for any refuge.
One might give infinite examples of this matter, but I wish to
be content with only one that happened within the memory of
our fathers. Messer Annibale Bentivoglio, grandfather of the
present Messer Annibale, who was prince in Bologna, was killed
by the Canneschi conspiring against him, and no one survived
him but Messer Giovanni, who was in swaddling clothes.
Immediately after that homicide the people rose up and killed
all the Canneschi. This came from the popular good will the
house of Bentivoglio had in those times, which was so great that
since there remained no one of that house in Bologna who could
rule the state, Annibale being dead, and since there was
indication that in Florence someone had been born of the
Bentivogli who was considered until then the son of a
blacksmith, the Bolognese came to Florence for him and gave
him the government of their city, which was governed by him
until Messer Giovanni reached an age suitable for governing.
6
I conclude, therefore, that a prince should take little account
of conspiracies if the people show good will to him; but if they
are hostile and bear hatred for him, he should fear everything
and everyone. And well-ordered states and wise princes have
thought out with all diligence how not to make the great
desperate and how to satisfy the people and keep them content,
107
because this is one of the most important matters that concern a
prince.
Among the well-ordered and governed kingdoms in our
times is that of France;
7 and in it are infinite good institutions on
which the liberty and security of the king depend. The first of
these is the parlement and its authority. For the one who
ordered that kingdom,
8 knowing the ambition of the powerful
and their insolence, and judging it necessary for them to have a
bit in their mouths to correct them, and on the other side,
knowing the hatred of the generality of people
9 against the
great, which is founded in its fear, and wanting to secure them,
intended this not to be the particular concern of the king, so as
to take from him the blame he would have from the great when
he favored the popular side, and from the popular side when he
favored the great; and so he constituted a third judge to be the
one who would beat down the great and favor the lesser side
without blame for the king. This order could not be better, or
more prudent, or a greater cause of the security of the king and
the kingdom. From this one can infer another notable thing: that
princes should have anything blameable administered by
others, favors
10 by themselves. Again I conclude that a prince
should esteem the great, but not make himself hated by the
people.
It might perhaps appear to many, considering the life and
death of some Roman emperor, that there were examples
contrary to my opinion, since one may find someone who has
always lived excellently, and shown great virtue of spirit, and
has nonetheless lost the empire or indeed been killed by his own
subjects who conspired against him. Since I want, therefore, to
respond to these objections, I shall discuss the qualities of
certain emperors, showing the causes of their ruin to be not
108
unlike that which I have advanced; and in part I shall offer for
consideration things that are notable for whoever reads about
the actions of those times. And I want it to suffice for me to take
all the emperors who succeeded to the empire, from Marcus the
philosopher to Maximinus: these were Marcus, Commodus his
son, Pertinax, Julianus, Severus, his son Antoninus Caracalla,
Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander,
11 and Maximinus. And first
it is to be noted that whereas in other principalities one has to
contend only with the ambition of the great and the insolence of
the people, the Roman emperors had a third difficulty, of
having to bear with the cruelty and avarice of their soldiers. This
was so difficult that it was the cause of the ruin of many, since it
was difficult to satisfy the soldiers and the people. For the
people loved quiet, and therefore loved modest princes, and the
soldiers loved a prince with a military spirit who was insolent,
cruel, and rapacious. They wanted him to practice these things
on the people so that they could double their pay and give vent
to their avarice and cruelty. These things always brought about
the ruin of those emperors who by nature or by art did not have
a great reputation such that they could hold both in check. And
most of them, especially those who came to the principate as
new men, once they recognized the difficulty of these two
diverse humors, turned to satisfying the soldiers, caring little
about injuring the people. This course was necessary; for since
princes cannot fail to be hated by someone, they are at first
forced not to be hated by the people generally;
12 and when they
cannot continue this, they have to contrive with all industry to
avoid the hatred of those communities which are most
powerful. And so those emperors who because they were new
had need of extraordinary support stuck to the soldiers rather
than the people, which nonetheless turned out useful for them
109
or not according to whether that prince knew how to keep
himself in repute with them. From the causes mentioned above,
Marcus, Pertinax, and Alexander, all living a modest life, lovers
of justice, enemies of cruelty, humane and kind, all, except for
Marcus, came to a bad end. Only Marcus lived and died most
honorably, because he succeeded to the empire by hereditary
right and did not have to acknowledge it as from either the
soldiers or the people; then, since he was attended with many
virtues that made him venerable, while he lived he always kept
the one order and the other within its bounds, and was never
either hated or despised. But Pertinax was created emperor
against the will of the soldiers, who, since they were used to
living in license under Commodus, could not tolerate the decent
life to which Pertinax wanted to return them; hence, having
created hatred for himself, and to this hatred added disdain
since he was old, he was ruined in the first beginnings of his
administration.
And here one should note that hatred is acquired through
good deeds as well as bad ones; and so, as I said above,
13 a
prince who wants to maintain his state is often forced not to be
good. For when that community
14 of which you judge you have
need to maintain yourself is corrupt, whether they are the
people or the soldiers or the great, you must follow their humor
to satisfy them, and then good deeds are your enemy. But let us
come to Alexander. He was of such goodness that among the
other praise attributed to him is this: that in the fourteen years
he held the empire no one was ever put to death by him without
a trial. Nonetheless, since he was held to be effeminate and a
man who let himself be governed by his mother, and for this
came to be despised, the army conspired against him and killed
him.
110
Reviewing
15 now, by contrast, the qualities of Commodus, of
Severus,
16 Antoninus Caracalla, and Maximinus, you
17 will find
them very cruel and very rapacious. To satisfy the soldiers, they
would not spare any kind of injury that could be inflicted on the
people; and all except Severus came to a bad end. For in Severus
was so much virtue that, by keeping the soldiers his friends,
although the people were overburdened by him, he was always
able to rule happily because his virtues made him so admirable
in the sight of the soldiers and the people that the latter
remained somehow astonished and stupefied, while the former
were reverent and satisfied.
And because the actions of this man were great and notable in
a new prince, I want to show briefly how well he knew how to
use the persons of the fox and the lion, whose natures I say
above
18 are necessary for a prince to imitate. Since Severus knew
of the indolence of Emperor Julianus, he persuaded his army, of
which he was captain in Slavonia, that it would be good to go to
Rome and avenge the death of Pertinax, who had been put to
death by the praetorian soldiers. Under this pretext, without
showing that he aspired to the empire, he moved his army
against Rome; and he was in Italy before his departure was
known. When he arrived at Rome, he was elected emperor by
the Senate out of fear and Julianus put to death. After this
beginning there remained two difficulties for Severus if he
wanted to become lord of the whole state: one in Asia, where
Pescennius Niger, the head of the Asian armies, had had himself
called emperor; and the other in the West, where Albinus also
aspired to the empire. And because he judged it dangerous to
disclose himself as an enemy to both, he decided to attack Niger
and deceive Albinus. To Albinus he wrote that since he had
been elected emperor by the Senate he wanted to share that
111
dignity with him; he sent him the title of Caesar, and by
decision of the Senate accepted him as colleague. These things
were accepted by Albinus as true. But after Severus had
defeated Niger, put him to death, and brought peace to affairs in
the East, he returned to Rome and complained in the Senate that
Albinus, hardly grateful for the benefits he had received from
him, had perfidiously sought to kill him, and for this it was
necessary for Severus to go punish his ingratitude. Then he
went to meet him in France, and took from him his state and his
life.
Thus, whoever examines minutely the actions of this man will
find him a very fierce lion and a very astute fox, will see that he
was feared and revered by everyone, and not hated by the army,
and will not marvel that he, a new man, could have held so
much power.
19 For his very great reputation always defended
him from the hatred that the people could have conceived for
him because of his robberies. But his son Antoninus [Caracalla]
was himself a man who had most excellent parts that made him
marvelous in the sight of the people and pleasing to the soldiers.
For he was a military man, very capable of enduring every
trouble, disdainful of all delicate food and of all other softness,
which made him loved by all the armies. Nonetheless, his
ferocity and cruelty were so great and so unheard of—for after
infinite individual killings he had put to death a great part of
the people of Rome and all the people of Alexandria—that he
became most hateful to all the world. He began to be feared
even by those whom he had around him, so that he was killed
by a centurion in the midst of his army. Here it is to be noted
that deaths such as these, which follow from the decision of an
obstinate spirit, cannot be avoided by princes because anyone
who does not care about death can hurt
20 him; but the prince
112
may well fear them less because they are very rare. He should
only guard against doing grave injury to anyone of those whom
he uses and has around him in the service of his principality, as
Antoninus had done. He had put to death with disgrace a
brother of that centurion, and threatened him every day; yet he
kept him in his bodyguard, which was a rash policy likely to
bring ruin, as happened to him.
21
But let us come to Commodus, who held the empire with
great ease because he had it by hereditary right, being the son of
Marcus. It was enough for him only to follow in the footsteps of
his father, and he would have satisfied both the soldiers and the
people. But since he had a cruel and bestial spirit, so as to
practice his rapacity on the people he turned to indulging the
armies and making them licentious. On the other hand, by not
keeping his dignity, by descending often into theaters to fight
with gladiators, and by doing other very base things hardly
deserving of the imperial majesty, he became contemptible in
the sight of the soldiers. And since he was hated on one side and
despised on the other, he was conspired against and put to
death.
It remains now to tell of the qualities of Maximinus. He was a
very warlike man; and since the armies were disgusted with the
softness of Alexander, whom I discussed above, when he was
put to death they elected Maximinus to the empire. He did not
possess it for long because two things made him hated and
contemptible: one was being of very base origin
22 because he
had formerly herded sheep in Thrace (which was very well
known everywhere and brought great disdain for him in the
sight of everyone); the other was that because at the start of his
principality he had deferred going to Rome and taking
possession of the imperial throne, he had established an opinion
113
of himself as very cruel, since he had committed many cruelties
through his prefects in Rome and everywhere in the empire. So,
since the whole world was excited by indignation at the
baseness of his blood and by hatred arising from fear of his
ferocity, Africa rebelled first, then the Senate with all the people
of Rome; and all Italy conspired against him. These were joined
by his own army, which, while besieging Aquileia and finding
difficulty in capturing it, became disgusted with this cruelty,
and fearing him less because it saw he had so many enemies, it
killed him.
I do not want to reason about either Heliogabalus or Macrinus
or Julianus, who, because they were altogether contemptible,
were immediately eliminated; but I shall come to the conclusion
of this discourse. And I say that the princes of our times have
less of this difficulty of satisfying the soldiers by extraordinary
means in their governments. For notwithstanding that one has
to show them some consideration, yet this is quickly settled
because none of these princes has armies joined together which
are entrenched in the government and administration of
provinces, as were the armies of the Roman Empire. And so, if
at that time it was necessary to satisfy the soldiers rather than
the people, it was because the soldiers could do more than the
people. Now it is necessary for all princes except the Turk and
the Sultan
23
to satisfy the people rather than the soldiers,
because the people can do more than the soldiers. I except the
Turk from this, since he always keeps around him twelve
thousand infantry and fifteen thousand horse on whom the
security and strength of his kingdom depend; and it is necessary
for that lord to put off every other regard and keep them his
friends. Similarly, since the kingdom of the sultan is in the
hands of the soldiers, he also is required to keep them his
114
friends, without respect for the people. And you
24 have to note
that the sultan’s state is formed unlike all other principalities
because it is similar to the Christian pontificate, which cannot be
called either a hereditary principality or a new principality. For
it is not the sons of the old prince who are the heirs and become
the lords, but the one who is elected to that rank by those who
have the authority for it. And this being an ancient order, one
cannot call it a new principality, because some of the difficulties
in new principalities are not in it; for if the prince is indeed new,
the orders of that state are old and are ordered to receive him as
if he were their hereditary lord.
But let us return to our matter. I say that whoever considers
the discourse written above will see that either hatred or disdain
has been the cause of the ruin of the emperors named before,
and will also know whence it arises that, though some of them
proceeded in one mode and some in the contrary mode, in
whichever mode, one of them came to a happy end and the
others to unhappy ends. For to Pertinax and Alexander, because
they were new princes, it was useless and harmful to wish to
imitate Marcus, who was in the principate by hereditary right;
and similarly, for Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximinus it was
a pernicious thing to imitate Severus, because they did not have
as much virtue as would allow them to follow in his footsteps.
Therefore, a new prince in a new principality cannot imitate the
actions of Marcus, nor again is it necessary to follow those of
Severus; but he should take from Severus those parts which are
necessary to found his state and from Marcus those which are
fitting and glorious to conserve a state that is already
established and firm.
115
XX
Whether Fortresses and Many Other Things
Which Are Made and Done by Princes Every
Day Are Useful or Useless
Some princes have disarmed their subjects so as to hold their
states securely; some others have kept their subject towns
divided; some have nourished enmities against themselves;
some others have turned to gaining to themselves those who
had been suspect to them at the beginning of their states; some
have built fortresses; some have knocked them down and
destroyed them. And although one cannot give a definite
judgment on all these things unless one comes to the particulars
of those states where any such decision has to be made,
nonetheless I shall speak in that broad mode which the matter
permits in itself.
There has never been, then, a new prince who has disarmed
his subjects; on the contrary, whenever he has found them
unarmed, he has always armed them. For when they are armed,
those arms become yours; those whom you suspected become
faithful, and those who were faithful remain so; and from
subjects they are made into your partisans. And because all
subjects cannot be armed, if those whom you arm are benefited,
one can act with more security toward the others. The difference
of treatment that they recognize regarding themselves makes
them obligated to you; the others excuse you, judging it
necessary that those who have more danger and more
116
obligation deserve more. But, when you disarm them, you begin
to offend them; you show that you distrust them either for
cowardice or for lack of faith, both of which opinions generate
hatred against you. And because you cannot remain unarmed,
you must turn to a mercenary military, which is of the quality
described above;
1 and even if it were good, it cannot be so good
as to defend you against powerful enemies and suspect subjects.
So, as I said, a new prince of a new principality always has
ordered the arms there. The histories are full of examples of this.
But when a prince acquires a new state that is added as a
member to his old one, then it is necessary to disarm that state,
except for those who were your partisans in acquiring it. These,
too, it is necessary to render soft and effeminate, in time and
with opportunity, and to be ordered so that the arms of all your
state are only with your own soldiers, who live next to you in
your old state.
Our ancients, and those who were esteemed wise, used to say
that it was necessary to hold Pistoia with parties and Pisa with
fortresses; and because of this they nourished differences in
some towns subject to them, so as to hold them more easily. In
times when Italy was in balance in a certain mode, this would
have been good to do, but I do not believe that one could give it
today as a teaching. For I do not believe that divisions ever do
any good; on the contrary, when the enemy approaches, of
necessity divided cities are immediately lost, because the
weaker party always joins the external forces and the other will
not be able to rule.
The Venetians, moved as I believe by the reasons written
above, nourished the Guelf and Ghibelline sects in the cities
subject to them. Although the Venetians never let them come to
blood, still they nourished these contentions among them, so
117
that occupied as those citizens were with their differences, they
did not unite against the Venetians. As may be seen, this did not
turn out according to their plan later, because when they were
defeated at Vailà, one party immediately became daring, and
took all of their state from them. Such modes, therefore, imply
weakness in the prince. For in a vigorous principality such
divisions are never permitted, because they bring profit only in
time of peace, as subjects can be managed more easily through
them; but when war comes, such an order shows its own
fallaciousness.
Without doubt princes become great when they overcome
difficulties made for them and opposition made to them. So
fortune, especially when she wants to make a new prince great
—since he has a greater necessity to acquire reputation than a
hereditary prince—makes enemies arise for him and makes
them undertake enterprises against him, so that he has cause to
overcome them and to climb higher on the ladder that his
enemies have brought for him. Therefore many judge that a
wise prince, when he has the opportunity for it, should astutely
nourish some enmity so that when he has crushed it, his
greatness emerges the more from it.
Princes, and especially those that are new, have found more
faith and more utility in those men who at the beginning of their
states were held to be suspect than in those whom they trusted
at the beginning. Pandolfo Petrucci, prince of Siena, ruled his
state more with those who had been suspect to him than with
the others. But one cannot speak broadly of this thing because it
varies according to the subject. I will only say this, that the
prince will always be able to win over to himself with the
greatest ease those men who in the beginning of a principality
had been enemies, and who are of such quality that to maintain
118
themselves they need somewhere to lean. They are all the more
forced to serve him faithfully as they know it is more necessary
for them to cancel out with deeds the sinister opinion one has
taken of them. And so the prince always extracts more use from
them than from those who, while serving him with too much
security, neglect his affairs.
And since the matter requires it, I do not want to leave out a
reminder to princes who have newly taken a state through
internal support within it, that they consider well what cause
moved those who supported them to support them. If it is not
natural affection toward them but only because those
supporters were not content with that state, he will be able to
keep them his friends with trouble and great difficulty, because
it is impossible for him to make them content. And while
reviewing
2 well the cause of this, with examples drawn from
ancient and modern things, he will see that it is much easier to
gain as friends to himself men who were content with the state
beforehand, and therefore were his enemies, than those who,
because they were not content with it, became friends and gave
him support in seizing it.
It has been the custom of princes, so as to be able to hold their
states more securely, to build fortresses that would be a bridle
and bit for those who might plan to act against them, and to
have a secure refuge from sudden attack.
3
I praise this mode
because it has been used since antiquity. Nonetheless, in our
times Messer Niccolò Vitelli was seen to destroy two fortresses
in Città di Castello in order to hold that state. When
Guidobaldo, duke of Urbino, returned to his dominion from
which Cesare Borgia had expelled him, he razed all the
fortresses in that province to their foundations; and he judged
that without them he would with greater difficulty lose his state
119
again. When the Bentivogli returned to Bologna, they adopted
similar measures. Fortresses are thus useful or not according to
the times, and if they do well for you in one regard, they hurt
4
you in another. And one may discuss this issue thus. The prince
who has more fear of the people than of foreigners ought to
make fortresses, but the one who has more fear of foreigners
than of the people, ought to omit them. The castle in Milan built
by Francesco Sforza has brought and will bring more war to the
Sforza house than any other disorder of that state. Therefore the
best fortress there is, is not to be hated by the people, because
although you may have fortresses, if the people hold you in
hatred fortresses do not save you; for to peoples who have taken
up arms foreigners will never be lacking to come to their aid. In
our times fortresses have not been seen to bring profit to any
prince, unless to the Countess of Forlì, when Count Girolamo,
her consort, died; for by means of a fortress she was able to
escape a popular uprising,
5
to await help from Milan, and to
recover her state.
6 And the times then were such that a foreigner
could not help the people. But later, fortresses were worth little
to her when Cesare Borgia attacked her, and her hostile people
joined with the foreigner. Therefore, then and before it would
have been more secure for her not to be hated by the people
than to have had fortresses. So, having considered all these
things, I shall praise whoever makes fortresses and whoever
does not, and I shall blame anyone who, trusting in fortresses,
thinks little of being hated by the people.
120
XXI
What a Prince Should Do to Be Held in
Esteem
Nothing makes a prince so much esteemed as to carry on great
enterprises and to give rare examples of himself. In our times
we have Ferdinand of Aragon, the present king of Spain. This
man can be called an almost new prince because from being a
weak king he has become by fame and by glory the first king
among the Christians; and, if you consider his actions, you
1 will
find them all very great and some of them extraordinary. In the
beginning of his reign he attacked Granada, and that enterprise
was the foundation of his state. First, he made it at leisure and
without fear of being interfered with; he kept the minds of the
barons of Castile preoccupied; while thinking of that war, they
did not think of innovating. And in the meantime he acquired
reputation and power
2 over them which they did not perceive.
He was able to sustain armies with money from the Church and
the people, and with that long war to lay a foundation for his
own military, which later brought him honor. Besides this, in
order to undertake greater enterprises, always making use of
religion, he turned to an act of pious cruelty, expelling the
Marranos from his kingdom and despoiling it of them;
3 nor
could there be an example more wretched and rarer than this.
He attacked Africa under this same cloak, made his campaign in
Italy, and has lately attacked France;
4 and so he has always done
and ordered great things, which have always kept the minds of
121
his subjects in suspense and admiration, and occupied with
their outcome. And his actions have followed upon one another
in such a mode that he has never allowed an interval between
them for men to be able to work quietly against him.
It also helps very much for a prince to give rare examples of
himself in governing internally, similar to those that are told of
Messer Bernabò da Milano,
5 when the opportunity arises of
someone who works for something extraordinary in civil life,
either for good or for ill, and of picking a mode of rewarding or
punishing him of which much will be said. And above all a
prince should contrive to give himself the fame of a great man
and of an excellent talent
6
in every action of his.
A prince is also esteemed when he is a true friend and a true
enemy, that is, when without any hesitation he discloses himself
in support of someone against another. This course is always
more useful than to remain neutral, because if two powers close
to you come to grips, either they are of such quality that if one
wins, you have to fear the winner, or not. In either of these two
cases, it will always be more useful to you to disclose yourself
and to wage open
7 war; for in the first case if you do not
disclose yourself, you will always be the prey of whoever wins,
to the pleasure and satisfaction of the one who was defeated,
and you have no reason, nor anything, to defend you or give
you refuge. For whoever wins does not want suspect friends
who may not help him in adversity; whoever loses does not give
you refuge, since you did not want to share his fortune with
arms in hand.
Antiochus came into Greece, summoned there by the
Aetolians to expel the Romans from it. Antiochus sent
spokesmen to the Achaeans, who were friends of the Romans, to
urge them to remain in the middle; and on the other side, the
122
Romans sought to persuade them to take up arms for them. This
matter came up for decision in the council of the Achaeans,
where the legate from Antiochus was persuading them to
remain neutral, to which the Roman legate responded: “As to
what they say, moreover, that you should not intervene in the
war, nothing is more alien to your interests; without thanks,
without dignity you will be the prize of the victor.”
8
And it will always happen that the one who is not friendly
will seek your neutrality, and he who is friendly to you will ask
that you declare yourself with arms. And irresolute princes, in
order to escape present dangers, follow that neutral way most
times, and most times come to ruin. But, when the prince
discloses himself boldly in support of one side, if the one to
whom you adhere wins, although he is powerful and you
remain at his discretion, he has an obligation to you and has a
contract of love for you; and men are never so indecent as to
crush you with so great an example of ingratitude. Then, too,
victories are never so clear that the winner does not have to
have some respect, especially for justice. But if the one to whom
you adhere loses, you are given refuge by him; and he helps you
while he can, and you become the companion of a fortune that
can revive. In the second case, when those who fight together
are of such quality that you do not have to fear the one who
wins, so much the greater is the prudence of joining sides; for
you assist in the ruin of one with the aid of the other who ought
to save him, if he were wise; and when he has won, he remains
at your discretion; and with your aid it is impossible that he not
win.
And here it is to be noted that a prince must beware never to
associate with someone more powerful than himself so as to
attack
9 others, except when necessity presses, as was said above.
123
For when you win, you are left his prisoner, and princes should
avoid as much as they can being at the discretion of others. The
Venetians accompanied France against the duke of Milan, and
they could have avoided being in that company—from which
their ruin resulted. But when one cannot avoid it (as happened
to the Florentines when the pope and Spain went with their
armies to attack Lombardy), then the prince should join for the
reasons given above. Nor should any state ever believe that it
can always adopt safe courses; on the contrary, it should think it
has to take them all as doubtful. For in the order of things it is
found that one never seeks to avoid one inconvenience without
running into another; but prudence consists in knowing how to
recognize the qualities of inconveniences, and in picking the less
bad as good.
A prince should also show himself a lover of the virtues,
giving recognition to virtuous men, and he should honor those
who are excellent in an art. Next, he should inspire his citizens
to follow their pursuits quietly, in trade and in agriculture and
in every other pursuit of men, so that one person does not fear
to adorn his possessions for fear that they be taken away from
him, and another to open up a trade for fear of taxes. But he
should prepare rewards for whoever wants to do these things,
and for anyone who thinks up any way of expanding his city or
his state. Besides this, he should at suitable times of the year
keep the people occupied with festivals and spectacles. And
because every city is divided into guilds or into clans, he should
take account of those communities,
10 meet with them
sometimes, and make himself an example of humanity and
munificence, always holding firm the majesty of his dignity
nonetheless, because he can never want this to be lacking in
anything.
124
XXII
Of Those Whom Princes Have as Secretaries
The choice of ministers is of no small importance to a prince;
they are good or not according to the prudence of the prince.
And the first conjecture that is to be made of the brain of a lord
is to see the men he has around him; and when they are capable
and faithful, he can always be reputed wise because he has
known how to recognize them as capable and to maintain them
as faithful. But if they are otherwise, one can always pass
unfavorable judgment on him, because the first error he makes,
he makes in this choice.
There was no one who knew Messer Antonio da Venafro
1 as
minister of Pandolfo Petrucci, prince of Siena,
2 who did not
judge Pandolfo to be a most worthy man, since he had Antonio
as his minister. And since there are three kinds of brains: one
that understands by itself, another that discerns what others
understand, the third that understands neither by itself nor
through others; the first is most excellent, the second excellent,
and the third useless—it follows, therefore, of necessity that, if
Pandolfo was not in the first rank, he was in the second. For
every time that one has the judgment to recognize the good or
evil that someone does or says, although he does not have the
inventiveness by himself, he knows the bad deeds and the good
of his minister and extols
3
the one and corrects the other; and
the minister cannot hope to deceive him and remains good
himself.
125
But as to how a prince can know his minister, here is a mode
that never fails. When you see a minister thinking more of
himself than of you, and in all actions looking for something
useful to himself, one so made will never be a good minister;
never will you be able to trust him, because he who has
someone’s state in his hands should never think of himself but
always of the prince, and he should never remember anything
that does not pertain to the prince. And on the other side, the
prince should think of the minister so as to keep him good—
honoring him, making him rich, obligating him to himself,
sharing honors and burdens with him so that he sees he cannot
stand without the prince and so that many honors do not make
him desire more honors, much wealth does not make him desire
more wealth, and many burdens make him fear changes. When,
therefore, ministers and princes in relation to ministers are so
constituted, they can trust one another; when it is otherwise, the
end is always damaging either for one or the other.
126
XXIII
In What Mode Flatterers Are to Be Avoided
I do not want to leave out an important point and an error from
which princes defend themselves with difficulty, unless they are
very prudent or make good choices. And these are the flatterers
of whom courts are full; for men take such pleasure in their own
affairs and so deceive themselves there that they defend
themselves with difficulty from this plague, and in trying to
defend oneself from it one risks the danger of becoming
contemptible. For there is no other way to guard oneself from
flattery unless men understand that they do not offend you in
telling you the truth; but when everyone can tell you the truth,
they lack reverence for you. Therefore, a prudent prince must
hold to a third mode, choosing wise men in his state; and only
to these should he give freedom1
to speak the truth to him, and
of those things only that he asks about and nothing else. But he
should ask them about everything and listen to their opinions;
then he should decide by himself, in his own mode; and with
these councils and with each member of them he should behave
in such a mode that everyone knows that the more freely he
speaks, the more he will be accepted. Aside from these, he
should not want to hear anyone; he should move directly to the
thing that was decided and be obstinate in his decisions.
Whoever does otherwise either falls headlong because of
flatterers or changes often because of the variability of views,
from which a low estimation of him arises.
127
I want to bring up a modern example in this regard. Father
Luca, a man of the present emperor Maximilian,
2 speaking of his
majesty, told how he did not take counsel from anyone and
never did anything in his own mode; this arose from holding to
a policy contrary to that given above. For the emperor is a
secretive man who does not communicate his plans to anyone,
nor seek their views; but as in putting them into effect they
begin to be known and disclosed, they begin to be contradicted
by those whom he has around him, and he, an agreeable
3
person, is dissuaded from them.
4 From this it arises that the
things he does on one day he destroys on another, that no one
ever understands what he wants or plans to do, and that one
cannot found oneself on his decisions.
A prince, therefore, should always take counsel, but when he
wants, and not when others want it; on the contrary, he should
discourage everyone from counseling him about anything
unless he asks it of them. But he should be a very broad
questioner, and then, in regard to the things he asked about, a
patient listener to the truth; indeed, he should become upset
when he learns that anyone has any hesitation to speak it to
him. And since many esteem that any prince who establishes an
opinion of himself as prudent is so considered not because of his
nature but because of the good counsel he has around him,
without doubt they are deceived. For this is a general rule that
never fails: that a prince who is not wise by himself cannot be
counseled well, unless indeed by chance he should submit
himself to one alone to govern him in everything, who is a very
prudent man. In this case he could well be, but it would not last
long because that governor would in a short time take away his
state. But by taking counsel from more than one, a prince who is
not wise will never have united counsel, nor know by himself
128
how to unite them. Each one of his counselors will think of his
own interest; he will not know how to correct them or
understand them. And they cannot be found otherwise, because
men will always turn out bad for you unless they have been
made good by a necessity. So one concludes that good counsel,
from wherever it comes, must arise from the prudence of the
prince, and not the prudence of the prince from good counsel.
129
XXIV
Why the Princes of Italy Have Lost Their
States
When the things written above have been observed prudently,
they make a new prince appear ancient and immediately render
him more secure and steady in his state than if he had grown
old in it. For a new prince is observed much more in his actions
than a hereditary one; and when they are recognized as
virtuous, they take hold of men much more and obligate them
much more than ancient blood. For men are much more taken
by present things than by past ones, and when they find good in
the present, they enjoy it and do not seek elsewhere; indeed they
will take up every defense on behalf of a new prince if he is not
lacking in other things as regards himself. And so he will have
the double glory of having made the beginning of a new
principality, of having adorned it and consolidated it with good
laws, good arms, good friends,
1 and good examples, just as he
has a double shame who, having been born prince, has lost it
through his lack of prudence.
And if one considers those lords in Italy who have lost their
states in our times, like the king of Naples,
2
the duke of Milan,
3
and others, one will find in them, first, a common defect as to
arms, the causes of which have been discussed at length above;
then, one will see that some of them either had a hostile people
or if they had friendly peoples, did not know how to secure
themselves against the great. For without these defects, states
130
that have enough nerve to put an army into the field are not lost.
Philip of Macedon, not the father of Alexander but the one who
was defeated by Titus Quintius,
4 did not have much of a state
with respect to the greatness of the Romans and of Greece, who
attacked him; nonetheless, because he was a military man and
knew how to deal with the people and secure himself against
the great, he kept up a war against them for many years; and if
at the end he lost dominion over several cities, his kingdom
remained to him nonetheless.
Therefore, these princes of ours who have been in their
principalities for many years may not accuse fortune when they
have lost them afterwards, but their own indolence; for, never
having thought that quiet times could change (which is a
common defect of men, not to take account of the storm during
the calm), when later the times became adverse, they thought of
fleeing and not of defending themselves. And they hoped that
their peoples, disgusted with the insolence of the victors, would
call them back. This course is good when others are lacking; but
it is indeed bad to have put aside other remedies for this one.
For one should never fall in the belief you can find someone to
pick you up. Whether it does not happen or happens, it is not
security for you, because that defense was base and did not
depend on you. And those defenses alone are good, are certain,
and are lasting, that depend on you yourself and on your virtue.
131
XXV
How Much Fortune Can Do in Human
Affairs, and in What Mode It May Be
Opposed
It is not unknown to me that many have held and hold the
opinion that worldly things are so governed by fortune and by
God, that men cannot correct them with their prudence, indeed
that they have no remedy at all; and on account of this they
might judge that one need not sweat much over things but let
oneself be governed by chance. This opinion has been believed
more in our times because of the great variability of things
which have been seen and are seen every day, beyond every
human conjecture. When I have thought about this sometimes, I
have been in some part inclined to their opinion. Nonetheless,
so that our free will not be eliminated, I judge that it might be
true that fortune is arbiter of half of our actions, but also that she
leaves the other half, or close to it, for us to govern. And I liken
her to one of these violent rivers which, when they become
enraged, flood the plains, ruin the trees and the buildings, lift
earth from this part, drop in another; each person flees before
them, everyone yields to their impetus without being able to
hinder them in any regard. And although they are like this, it is
not as if men, when times are quiet, could not provide for them
with dikes and dams so that when they rise later, either they go
by a canal or their impetus is neither so wanton nor so
damaging. It happens similarly with fortune, which
132
demonstrates her power where virtue has not been put in order
1
to resist her and therefore turns her impetus where she knows
that dams and dikes have not been made to contain her. And if
you consider Italy, which is the seat of these variations and that
which has given them motion, you will see
2 a country without
dams and without any dike. If it had been diked by suitable
virtue, like Germany, Spain, and France, either this flood would
not have brought the great variations that it has, or it would not
have come here.
And I wish that this may be enough to have said about
opposing fortune in general.
3 But restricting myself more to
particulars, I say that one sees a given prince be happy today
and come to ruin tomorrow without having seen him change his
nature or any quality. This I believe arises, first, from the causes
that have been discussed at length in the preceding, that is, that
the prince who leans entirely on his fortune comes to ruin as it
varies. I believe, further, that he is happy who adapts his mode
of proceeding to the qualities of the times; and similarly, he is
unhappy whose procedure is in disaccord with the times. For
one sees that in the things that lead men to the end that each has
before him, that is, glories and riches, they proceed variously:
one with caution,
4
the other with impetuosity; one by violence,
the other with art; one with patience, the other with its contrary
—and with these different modes each can attain it. One also
sees two cautious persons, one attaining his plan, the other not;
and similarly two persons are equally happy with two different
methods, one being cautious, the other impetuous. This arises
from nothing other than from the quality of the times that they
conform to or not in their procedure. From this follows what I
said, that two persons working differently come out with the
same effect; and of two persons working identically, one is led
133
to his end, the other not. On this also depends the variability of
the good: for if one governs himself with caution and patience,
and the times and affairs turn in such a way that his
government is good, he comes out happy; but if the times and
affairs change, he is ruined because he does not change his
mode of proceeding. Nor may a man be found so prudent as to
know how to accommodate himself to this, whether because he
cannot deviate from what nature inclines him to or also because,
when one has always flourished by walking on one path, he
cannot be persuaded to depart from it. And so the cautious man,
when it is time to come to impetuosity, does not know how to
do it, hence comes to ruin: for if he would change his nature
with the times and with affairs, his fortune would not change.
Pope Julius II proceeded impetuously in all his affairs, and he
found the times and affairs so much in conformity with his
mode of proceeding that he always achieved a happy end.
Consider
5
the first enterprise that he undertook in Bologna,
while Messer Giovanni Bentivoglio was still living. The
Venetians were not content with it; nor was the king of Spain;
with France he was holding discussions
6 on that enterprise; and
nonetheless, with his ferocity and impetuosity, he personally
put that expedition into motion. This move made Spain and the
Venetians stand still in suspense, the latter out of fear and the
other because of the desire he had to recover the whole kingdom
of Naples. From the other side he pulled the king of France after
him; because when that king saw him move, and since he
desired to make Julius his friend in order to bring down the
Venetians, he judged he could not deny him his troops without
injuring him openly. Julius thus accomplished with his
impetuous move what no other pontiff, with all human
prudence, would ever have accomplished, because if he had
134
waited to depart from Rome with firm conclusions and
everything in order, as any other pontiff would have done, he
would never have succeeded. For the king of France would have
had a thousand excuses and the others would have raised in
him a thousand fears. I wish to omit all his other actions, since
all have been alike and all succeeded well. And the brevity of
his life did not allow him to feel the contrary, because if times
had come when he had needed to proceed with caution, his ruin
would have followed: he would never have deviated from those
modes to which nature inclined him.
7
I conclude, thus, that when fortune varies and men remain
obstinate in their modes, men are happy while they are in
accord, and as they come into discord, unhappy. I judge this
indeed, that it is better to be impetuous than cautious, because
fortune is a woman; and it is necessary, if one wants to hold her
down, to beat her and strike her down. And one sees that she
lets herself be won more by the impetuous than by those who
proceed coldly. And so always, like a woman, she is the friend
of the young, because they are less cautious, more ferocious, and
command her with more audacity.
135
XXVI
Exhortation to Seize Italy and to Free Her
from the Barbarians
Thus, having considered everything discussed above, and
thinking to myself whether in Italy at present the times have
been tending to the honor of a new prince, and whether there is
matter to give opportunity to someone prudent and virtuous to
introduce a form that would bring honor to him and good to the
community of men there, it appears to me that so many things
are tending to the benefit of a new prince that I do not know
what time has ever been more apt for it. And if, as I said,
1
it was
necessary for anyone wanting to see the virtue of Moses that the
people of Israel be enslaved in Egypt, and to learn the greatness
of spirit of Cyrus, that the Persians be oppressed by the Medes,
and to learn the excellence of Theseus, that the Athenians be
dispersed, so at present to know the virtue of an Italian spirit
2
it
was necessary that Italy be reduced to the condition in which
she is at present, which is more enslaved than the Hebrews,
more servile than the Persians, more dispersed than the
Athenians, without a head, without order, beaten, despoiled,
torn, pillaged, and having endured ruin of every sort.
And although up to now a glimmer has shone in someone
who could judge that he had been ordered by God for her
redemption, yet later it was seen that in the highest course of his
actions, he was repulsed by fortune. So, left as if lifeless, she
awaits whoever it can be that will heal her wounds, and put an
136
end to the sacking of Lombardy, to the taxes on the kingdom
and on Tuscany, and cure her of her sores that have festered
now for a long time. One may see how she prays God to send
her someone to redeem her from these barbarous cruelties and
insults. One may also see her ready and disposed to follow a
flag, provided that there be someone to pick it up. Nor may one
see at present anyone in whom she can hope more than in your
illustrious house, which with its fortune and virtue, supported
by God and by the Church of which it is now prince,
3 can put
itself at the head of this redemption. This is not very difficult if
you
4 summon up the actions and lives of those named above.
And although these men are rare and marvelous, nonetheless
they were men, and each of them had less opportunity than the
present; for their undertaking was not more just than this one,
nor easier, nor was God more friendly to them than to you. Here
there is great justice: “for war is just to whom it is necessary,
and arms are pious when there is no hope but in arms.”
5 Here
there is very great readiness, and where there is great readiness,
there cannot be great difficulty, provided that your house keeps
its aim on the orders of those whom I have put forth. Besides
this, here may be seen extraordinary things without example,
brought about
6 by God: the sea has opened; a cloud has escorted
you along the way; the stone has poured forth water; here
manna has rained;
7 everything has concurred in your greatness.
The remainder you must do yourself. God does not want to do
everything, so as not to take free will from us and that part of
the glory that falls to us.
And it is not a marvel if none of the Italians named before has
been able to do what it is hoped will be done by your illustrious
house, and if in so many revolutions in Italy and in so many
maneuvers of war, it always appears that military virtue has
137
died out in her. This arises from the fact that her ancient orders
were not good, and that there has not been anyone who has
known how to find new ones; and nothing brings so much
honor to a man rising newly as the new laws and the new
orders found by him. When these things have been founded
well and have greatness in them, they make him revered and
admirable. And in Italy matter is not lacking for introducing
every form; here there is great virtue in the limbs, if it were not
lacking in the heads. Look how in duels and in encounters with
few the Italians are superior in force, dexterity, and ingenuity.
But when it comes to armies, they do not compare. And
everything follows from the weakness at the head, because
those who know are not obeyed, and each thinks he knows,
since up to now no one has been able to raise himself, both by
virtue and by fortune, to a point where the others will yield to
him. From this it follows that in so much time, in so many wars
made in the last twenty years, when there has been an army
entirely Italian it has always proven to be bad. The first
testimony to this is Taro, then Alessandria, Capua, Genoa, Vailà,
Bologna, Mestre.
8
Thus, if your illustrious house wants to follow those excellent
men who redeemed their countries,
9
it is necessary before all
other things, as the true foundation of every undertaking, to
provide itself with its own arms; for one cannot have more
faithful, nor truer, nor better soldiers. And although each of
them may be good, all together become better when they see
themselves commanded by their prince, and honored and
indulged by him. It is necessary, therefore, to prepare such arms
for oneself so as to be able with Italian virtue to defend oneself
from foreigners. And although Swiss and Spanish infantry are
esteemed to be terrifying, nonetheless there is a defect in both,
138
by means of which a third order might not only oppose them
but also be confident of overcoming them. For the Spanish
cannot withstand horse, and the Swiss have to be afraid of
infantry if they meet in combat any that are obstinate like
themselves. Hence it has been seen, and will be seen by
experience, that the Spanish cannot withstand French cavalry,
and the Swiss are ruined by Spanish infantry. And although a
complete experiment of this last has not been seen, yet an
indication of it was seen in the battle of Ravenna,
10 when the
Spanish infantry confronted the German battalions, who use the
same order as the Swiss. There the Spanish, with their agile
bodies and aided by their bucklers, came between and under the
Germans’ pikes and attacked them safely without their having
any remedy for it; and if it had not been for the cavalry that
charged them, they would have worn out all the Germans.
Having thus learned the defects of both of these infantry, one
can order a new one that would resist horse and not be afraid of
infantry; this will be done by a regeneration of arms and a
change in orders. And these are among those things which,
when newly ordered, give reputation and greatness to a new
prince.
Thus, one should not let this opportunity pass, for Italy, after
so much time, to see her redeemer. I cannot express with what
love he would be received in all those provinces that have
suffered from these floods from outside; with what thirst for
revenge, with what obstinate faith, with what piety, with what
tears. What doors would be closed to him? What peoples would
deny him obedience? What envy would oppose him? What
Italian would deny him homage? This barbarian domination
stinks to everyone. Then may your illustrious house take up this
task with the spirit and hope in which just enterprises are taken
139
up, so that under its emblem this fatherland may be ennobled
and under its auspices the saying of Petrarch’s may come true:
Virtue will take up arms against fury,
and make the battle short,
because the ancient valor in Italian hearts
is not yet dead.
11
140
Appendix
In the following letter, which has been called the most
celebrated in all of Italian literature, Machiavelli describes one
day in his life and remarks casually that he has just completed
The Prince. The letter was written in response to his friend
Francesco Vettori, Florentine ambassador in Rome, who had
previously sent a letter describing a day in his life. Machiavelli’s
reply is partly a parody of Vettori’s somewhat self-important
recounting, but it also gives us a glimpse, from the outside, of
the political philosopher at work. We learn, among other things,
that The Prince arose from conversations with the ancients, and
that, in it, Machiavelli delved as deeply as he could into his
subject.
141
NICCOLÒ MACHIAVELLI TO FRANCESCO VETTORI,
FLORENCE, DECEMBER 10, 1513.
Magnificent ambassador:
“Never were divine favors late.”
1
I say this because I appear
to have lost, no, mislaid your favor, since you have gone a long
time without writing me, and I was doubtful whence the cause
could arise. And of all those that came to my mind I took little
account except for one, when I feared you had stopped writing
to me because someone had written to you that I was not a good
warden of your letters; and I knew that, apart from Filippo and
Pagolo, no one else had seen them on account of me. I regained
your favor by your last letter of the 23 rd of last month, where I
was very pleased to see how orderedly and quietly you exercise
this public office; and I urge you to continue so, for whoever lets
go of his own convenience for the convenience of others, only
loses his own and gets no thanks from them. And because
Fortune wants to do everything, she wants us to allow her to do
it, to remain quiet and not give trouble, and to await the time at
which she allows men something to do; and then it will be right
for you to give more effort, to watch things more, and for me to
leave my villa and say: “Here I am.” Therefore, wishing to
return equal favors, I cannot tell you in this letter of mine
anything other than what my life is like, and if you judge that it
should be bartered for yours, I will be content to exchange it.
I stay in my villa, and since these last chance events occurred,
2
I have not spent, to add them all up, twenty days in Florence.
Until now I have been catching thrushes with my own hands. I
would get up before day, prepare traps, and go out with a
142
bundle of cages on my back, so that I looked like Geta when he
returned from the harbor with Amphitryon’s books; I caught at
least two, at most six thrushes. And so passed all September;
then this pastime, though annoying and strange, gave out, to my
displeasure. And what my life is like, I will tell you. I get up in
the morning with the sun and go to a wood of mine that I am
having cut down, where I stay for two hours to look over the
work of the past day, and to pass time with the woodcutters,
who always have some disaster on their hands either among
themselves or with their neighbors. And regarding this wood I
would have a thousand beautiful things to tell you of what
happened to me with Frosino da Panzano and others who want
wood from it. And Frosino in particular sent for a number of
loads without telling me anything, and on payment wanted to
hold back ten lire from me, which he said he should have had
from me four years ago when he beat me at cricca at Antonio
Guicciardini’s. I began to raise the devil and was on the point of
accusing the driver who had gone for it of theft; but Giovanni
Machiavelli came between us and brought us to agree. Batista
Guicciardini, Filippo Ginori, Tommaso del Bene, and some other
citizens, when that north wind was blowing, ordered a load
each from me. I promised to all, and sent one to Tommaso
which in Florence turned into a half-load, because to stack it up
there were himself, his wife, his servant, and his children, so
that they looked like Gabbura with his boys when he bludgeons
an ox on Thursday. So, when I saw whose profit it was, I told
the others I had no more wood; and all have made a big point of
it, especially Batista, who counts this among the other disasters
of Prato.
When I leave the wood, I go to a spring, and from there to an
aviary of mine. I have a book under my arm, Dante or Petrarch,
143
or one of the minor poets like Tibullus, Ovid, and such. I read of
their amorous passions and their loves; I remember my own and
enjoy myself for a while in this thinking. Then I move on along
the road to the inn; I speak with those passing by; I ask them
news of their places; I learn various things; and I note the
various tastes and different fancies of men. In the meantime
comes the hour to dine, when I eat with my company what food
this poor villa and tiny patrimony allow. Having eaten, I return
to the inn; there is the host, ordinarily a butcher, a miller, two
bakers. With them I become a rascal for the whole day, playing
at cricca and tric-trac, from which arise a thousand quarrels and
countless abuses with insulting words, and most times we are
fighting over a penny and yet we can be heard shouting from
San Casciano. Thus involved with these vermin I scrape the
mold off my brain and I satisfy the malignity of this fate of
mine, as I am content to be trampled on this path so as to see if
she will be ashamed of it.
When evening has come, I return to my house and go into my
study. At the door I take off my clothes of the day, covered with
mud and mire, and I put on my regal and courtly garments; and
decently reclothed, I enter the ancient courts of ancient men,
where, received by them lovingly, I feed on the food that alone
is mine and that I was born for. There I am not ashamed to
speak with them and to ask them the reason for their actions;
and they in their humanity reply to me. And for the space of
four hours I feel no boredom, I forget every pain, I do not fear
poverty, death does not frighten me. I deliver myself entirely to
them. And because Dante says that to have understood without
retaining does not make knowledge,
3
I have noted what capital I
have made from their conversation and have composed a little
work De Principatibus [On Principalities], where I delve as
144
deeply as I can into reflections on this subject, debating what a
principality is, of what kinds they are, how they are acquired,
how they are maintained, why they are lost. And if you have
ever been pleased by any of my whimsies, this one should not
displease you; and to a prince, and especially to a new prince, it
should be welcome. So I am addressing it to his Magnificence,
Giuliano.
4 Filippo Casavecchia has seen it; he can give you an
account in part both of the thing in itself and of the discussions I
had with him, although I am all the time fattening and polishing
it.
You wish, magnificent ambassador, that I leave this life and
come to enjoy your life with you. I will do it in any case, but
what tempts me now is certain dealings of mine which I will
have done in six weeks. What makes me be doubtful is that the
Soderini are there, whom I would be forced, if I came, to visit
and speak with. I should fear that at my return I would not
expect to get off at my house, but I would get off at the
Bargello,
5
for although this state has very great foundations and
great security, yet it is new, and because of this suspicious; nor
does it lack wiseacres who, to appear like Pagolo Bertini, would
let others run up a bill and leave me to think of paying. I beg
you to relieve me of this fear, and then I will come in the time
stated to meet you anyway.
I have discussed with Filippo this little work of mine, whether
to give it to him6 or not; and if it is good to give it, whether it
would be good for me to take it or send it to you. Not giving it
would make me fear that at the least it would not be read by
Giuliano and that this Ardinghelli would take for himself the
honor of this latest effort of mine. The necessity that chases me
makes me give it, because I am becoming worn out, and I
cannot remain as I am for a long time without becoming
145
despised because of poverty, besides the desire I have that these
Medici lords begin to make use of me even if they should begin
by making me roll a stone. For if I should not then win them
over to me, I should complain of myself; and through this thing,
if it were read, one would see that I have neither slept through
nor played away the fifteen years I have been at the study of the
art of the state. And anyone should be glad to have the service
of one who is full of experience at the expense of another. And
one should not doubt my faith, because having always observed
faith, I ought not now be learning to break it. Whoever has been
faithful and good for forty-three years, as I have, ought not to be
able to change his nature, and of my faith and goodness my
poverty is witness.
I should like, then, for you to write me again on how this
matter appears to you, and I commend myself to you.
Be prosperous.
10 December 1513
Niccolò Machiavelli, in Florence.
146
Glossary
English terms appearing in the translation are in boldface, followed by the Italian or
Latin terms they translate in italics and the listing of their occurrences by chapter and
page number. Certain abbreviations are slightly different from those used in the
introduction and the notes to the text: ED refers to the dedicatory letter, and T to a
chapter title. A parenthetical number followed by a multiplication cross (X) indicates
multiple occurrences. (L) indicates a Latin word. Negatives and other words with
prefixes are listed with their root words. Indicators of parts of speech (n. for noun, v.
for verb, adj. for adjective) are given only where the English terms are identical. See also
refers to another English term used to translate that Italian word; cf. refers to an
etymologically or conceptually related term.
An asterisk next to an English or Italian term indicates that not all occurrences of that
term are listed in the glossary; all occurrences are given for other listed English terms
(when they translate Italian, not necessarily Latin) and for listed Italian terms (though
it may be necessary to consult the entries cross-referenced under See also to locate all
occurrences of a listed Italian term). Occurrences of English terms when they translate
Latin are usually given only when the Latin terms are cognates of the Italian term
translated. The glossary does not include words inserted in the translation in brackets
for clarification.
abject, abietta, 8.34
absolute, assoluto, 9.42 (2X)
accident, accidente, 2.6, 3.11, 5.21, 8.38, 14.60
account,* conto, 10.43, 18.69, 19.72 (2X), 19.74, 21.91, 24.97
accuse, accusare, 7.33, 24.97. Cf. excuse
accustom, assuefare, 2.6, 13.57, 14.59; accustom, consueto, 1.6, 5.20, 5.21; accustom,
solere,* 9.42. For solere, see also custom
acquire, acquisition, acquistare, acquisto, acquistato, acquiruntur (L), ED.3, 1.5 (T), 1.5, 1.6
(2X), 3.8 (2X), 3.9 (5X), 3.10, 3.11 (3X), 3.13, 3.14 (2X), 4.16, 4.17, 4.19, 5.20, 6.21 (T),
6.22 (2X), 6.23 (2X), 6.25, 7.25 (T), 7.26, 7.27, 7.28 (3X), 8.35, 8.36, 11.45, 12.48, 12.52
(3X), 13.55, 14.58, 16.64, 17.66, 17.67, 19.77, 20.84 (2X), 20.85, 21.88; reacquire,
riacquistare, 2.7. Cf. gain
action, azione, ED.3, 6.22 (2X), 6.23, 7.27, 7.32, 7.33, 8.35, 11.47, 13.55, 14.60 (2X), 17.67
(3X), 18.71, 19.72, 19.75, 19.78,19.79, 19.82, 21.88 (2X), 21.89, 22.93, 24.96, 25.98, 25.101,
26.102, 26.103
adequate, iusto, 10.43. See also just
administer, sumministrare, 16.64, 19.75; administrare (L), 5.20 (T); administrator,
amministratore, 4.17; administration, amministrazione, 19.76, 19.81
147
advantage, vantaggio, 3.12, 14.59 (2X); advantage, commodità, 19.73; disadvantage,
disavvantagio, 3.15. Cf. convenience
advocate (n.), avvocato, 7.30
afraid, avere paura, 7.33, 26.104, 26.105; pauroso, 3.10. See also fear alive, vivo, 7.32
alone, solo,* 3.12, 9.39, 11.45, 19.73; solamente, 24.97; one alone, uno solo, 23.95
ambition, ambizione, 3.11, 3.13, 4.17, 11.47, 12.51 (2X), 19.72, 19.74–75, 19.76; ambitious,
ambizioso, 3.14 (2X), 9.40, 12.48
ancient, antiquo, antico, antiquato, ED.3, 2.7, 3.9 (3X), 4.17, 5.21 (2X), 8.34, 12.50, 13.54,
18.69 (2X), 19.82, 20.84, 20.86, 24.96 (2X), 26.103, 26.105. For antiquo, antico, see also
antiquity; former; old
anticipation, sospetto, 19.73. See also suspect
antiquity, antiquità, 2.7, 4.17; since antiquity, ad antiquo, 20.86. For antiquo, see also
ancient; former; old
appetite, appetito, 9.39 (2X)
arbiter, arbitro, 3.11, 3.14, 12.53, 25.98. Cf free; liberty; will
arm* (n.), arma, armi, arme, arma (L), ED.3, 1.6, 3.8, 5.21, 6.21 (T), 7.25 (T), 7.27 (3X), 7.28
(3X), 7.30 (2X), 7.32, 11.46 (2X), 11.47, 12.48 (6X), 12.49 (5X), 12.50 (5X), 12.52 (4X),
12.53, 13.54 (6X), 13.55 (7X), 13.56 (7X), 13.57 (3X), 14.58 (2X), 19.72 (2X), 20.83 (2X),
20.84 (2X), 20.87, 21.89 (2X), 21.90, 24.96 (2X), 26.103 (2X) (L), 26.104 (2X), 26.105 (2X);
braccio, 7.29; men-at-arms, gente d’armi, gente d’arme, genti d’arme, 3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 13.56
(2X); arm (v.), armed, armare, armato, armo (L), 6.24, 7.30, 12.50 (4X), 12.51, 13.56 (2X),
13.57, 14.58 (4X), 20.83 (3X); disarm, disarmare, 20.83 (3X), 20.84; disarmed, disarmato
(adj.), 6.24 (2X), 12.50, 20.83; unarmed, disarmato, 13.54, 14.58 (4X), 20.83, 20.84; very
well armed, armatissimo, 12.50
army, esercito, 3.8, 3.9, 3.11, 4.18, 7.31, 7.32, 8.34, 9.41, 10.43, 10.44, 12.53, 13.54,
13.56(2X), 14.59(3X), 14.60(2X), 16.64(2X), 17.67(3X), 17.68, 19.77, 19.78(3X), 19.79(3X),
19.80(2X), 19.81(3X), 21.88, 21.91, 24.97, 26.101, 26.104
arrangements, governi, 7.30. See also govern
art, arte, 9.40, 14.58 (4X), 19.76, 21.91, 25.99. See also cunning
artillery, artiglie ria, 10.43
assert, asseverare, 18.70
associate, fare compagnia, 21.90
astonish, attonito, 19.78
astuteness, astutely, astute, astuzia, 9.39, 9.40, 18.68, 18.69, 20.85; astute, astuto, 15.62;
very astute, astutissima, 19.79
attack,* of endere, 7.30, 21.90, 26.05. See also hurt; offend
auspices, auspizii, 26.105
authority, autorità, 3.11, 3.14, 4.17, 4.19, 7.30, 9.39, 9.42, 13.55, 19.74, 19.82
avarice, avarizia, 19.76 (2X); avaro, untranslated, 15.61. Cf. revenge
avenge, vendicare, vendicarsi, 3.10, 17.68, 19.78
bad, cattivo, 17.67; bad, badly, malo, male, 7.33, 8.37, 8.38 (3X), 13.54, 17.65, 24.97, 26.104;
tristo, 19.77 (2X), 19.78, 21.91, 22.92, 23.95. For mal contento, see also content; for male,
see also evil; ill; for mal resoluto, see also irresolute. Cf. malignity
148
barbarian, barbaro, barbarus (L), 26.101 (T), 26.102, 26.105
base, vile, 24.97; very base, vilissimo, 19.80 (2X); baseness, viltà, 19.81; debase, invilire,
13.56. See also cowardice
battalion, battaglia, 26.105
battle,giornata, 10.43, 14.59, 26.105; battle, zuf a, 12.53; battle, el combatter[e], 26.105. For
giornata, see also day; for combattere, see also combat; fight
beast, bestia, 18.69 (4X); bestial, bestiale, 19.80
beg, pregare, 6.24, 8.36. See also pray
beginning (n.), principio, 3.12 (2X), 8.38, 12.48, 12.51, 13.55, 13.57, 19.77, 19.78, 20.83,
20.85 (3X), 21.88, 24.96
believe, credere, 3.8, 6.23–24, 6.24 (5X), 7.33, 8.37, 9.40, 12.49, 17.66, 19.73 (3X), 20.84
(3X), 21.91, 24.97, 25.98, 25.99 (2X); belief, credenza, 3.8; unbeliever, discredente, 6.24;
unbelieving, incredulo, 15.62; incredulity, incredulità, 6.23. Cf. credit; opinion;
reputation; trust
belongings, suppellettile, ED.3. Cf. property
benefit,* benefizio, 3.13, 5.21, 7.33, 8.38, 10.44, 19.79, 26.102; benificare, 7.33, 8.38, 20.83;
benefactor, beneficatore, 9.40
bit, freno, 19.75, 20.86. For freno, see also check; cf. bridle
blame (n.), biasimo, 3.15 (2X), 15.61; blame (v.), biasimare, biasimato, 3.13, 3.14, 20.87;
blamed, vituperant(ur) (L), 15.61 (T); blame, blame able, carico, 19.75 (3X). See also
burden; cf. insult
blood, sangue, 17.66, 19.81, 20.84, 24.96; bloodline, sangue, 1.5, 2.6, 3.9, 4.17, 4.18 (2X),
4.19, 5.21, 7.30; bloody, sanguinoso, 7.30. For sangue, see also life
body, corpo, 3.9, 8.34, 13.55, 14.59, 19.80, 26.105
born, nascere, 7.26, 8.34, 14.58, 19.74, 24.96
bought, meritare, 17.66. See also deserve, worthy
brain, cervello, 18.69, 22.92 (2X)
bridle, briglia, 20.86. Cf. bit, check
bring up, addurre, 6.22, 7.26, 23.94; bring up, allegare, 3.15. For allegare, see also cite
brother, fratello, 8.36, 19.80; Brother, fra’, 6.24
build, edificare, 6.25, 18.70, 20.83, 20.86, 20.87; building, edificazione, edifizio, 3.7, 6.25,
7.27, 25.98
burden (n.), carico, 22.93; burden (v.), gravare, 16.63 (2X), 19.78. For carico, see also
blame; for gravare, see also grave
call, chiamare, 3.7, 3.16, 4.18, 7.26, 8.35, 8.36, 8.37, 9.39, 11.45, 13.54 (2X), 15.61, 17.68,
19.78, 19.82 (2X), 21.88
campaign (n.), impresa, 3.15, 7.28 (2X), 13.54, 16.63, 16.64, 21.88; campaign (n.),
compagna, 14.59; campaign (v.), campeggiare,* 12.53. For impresa, see also enterprise;
undertaking; for campagna, see also country; field
capital, capitale, 14.60
captain (n.), capitano, 6.25, 8.35, 12.49 (3X), 12.50 (2X), 12.51 (3X), 12.52, 14.59, 19.78
capture, espugnazione, 7.28, 10.43, 19.81; capture (v.), espugnare, 12.51, 13.54
cardinal,* cardinale, 3.16, 7.33, 11.47 (2X)
149
care, cura, ED.3 (2X), 14.59, 18.70; care (v.), curare, 11.45, 15.62, 16.63, 17.65, 17.67, 19.79.
For curare, see also concern; cure
caress, vezzeggiare, 3.10
case,* caso, 3.12, 6.24, 9.41, 9.42, 10.43 (2X), 12.51, 16.64 (2X), 19.73, 21.89 (2X), 21.90,
23.95. See also chance
Castello, Castello, 20.86; castle, castello, 20.87
cause* (n.), cagione, 2.7 (3X), 3.7, 3.8, 3.9 (2X), 3.10, 3.16, 4.18, 7.27, 7.33, 9.40, 11.45, 11.46
(2X), 12.48 (3X), 12.49, 13.56, 13.57, 14.58 (3X), 14.60, 17.67 (3X), 18.69 (2X), 19.75 (2X),
19.76 (2X), 19.77, 19.82, 20.85, 20.86 (2X), 24.96, 25.99; cause (n.), causa, 17.67; cause
(v.), causare, 3.16 (3X), 9.39, 12.49
caution, respetto, 25.99, 25.100, 25.101; cautious, respettivo, 25.99 (2X), 25.100, 25.101
(2X). See also concern; hesitate; regard; respect
cavalry, cavalleria, 26.105 (2X). Cf. horse
centurion, centurione, 19.79, 19.80
century, secolo, 12.50
chance, caso, 14.60; chance, sorte, 12.51, 23.95, 25.98. For caso, see also case; for sorte, see
also sort
change (n.), variazione, 18.70, 23.94, 26.105; change (n.), mutazione, 2.7, 22.93; change
(n.), alterazione, 4.18, 11.47. For variare, variazione, see also variation
charity, carità, 18.70. See also love
chastity, castità, 14.60
check (v.), frenare, 7.31; check (v.), tenere,* 12.50; check (v.), raf renare, 19.72; check (n.),
freno, 19.76. For freno, see also bit; cf. bridle
child, figliuolo, 17.66; piccolo, 8.35. For figliuolo, see also son
choose, eleggere, 23.94; choice, elezione, 7.33 (2X), 13.54, 22.92 (2X), 23.93. See also elect
Christian, cristiano, 19.82, 21.88
church,* chiesa, 3.14 (3X), 3.15, 3.16, 7.27 (2X), 7.28, 7.31, 11.45, 11.46, 11.47 (4X), 12.51,
12.52 (2X), 21.88, 26.102
cite, cite before, allegare, preallegare, 3.15, 13.55, 17.65. See also bring up
citizen, cittadino, 5.20, 8.34 (2X), 8.35, 8.36 (2X), 8.37 (2X), 9.38, 9.39, 9.41, 9.42 (5X),
10.44, 12.49, 12.50 (2X), 12.52 (2X), 13.57, 17.67, 20.84, 21.91. Cf. city; civil
city,* città, 5.20, 5.21, 7.30, 8.35 (2X), 8.36, 8.37 (2X), 9.39, 10.43, 10.44, 19.74, 21.91 (2X);
civitas (L), 5.20 (T). Cf. citizen; civil
civil, civile, 7.30, 8.35, 8.37, 9.38, 9.39, 9.42, 21.89. Cf. citizen; city
civil life, vita civile, 21.89
colony, colonia, 3.10 (3X), 3.11 (2X), 3.12, 3.15
color, colorire, 18.69, 18.70. See also pretext
combat (n.), combattere, 26.104; combat (v.), combattere, 18.69, 19.72. See also battle; fight
command (v.), comandare, 7.26, 7.29, 9.39 (3X), 9.41, 9.42, 14.58, 18.71, 26.101, 26.104;
command (n.), comandamento, 9.42; command (n.), condotto,* 7.28. Cf. emperor;
empire; imperial; king; reign; rule
common, comune, 10.44, 24.96, 24.97
community, universalità, 17.66; community, università, 19.76, 19.77, 21.91, 26.102. See
150
also general; universal
company, being in, fare compagnia, 19.73, 21.90. See also associate
concern,* cura, 11.46 (2X), 19.75; concern,* maneggio, 19.72; concern,* respetto, 3.9. For
maneggio, respetto, see also care; cure; regard; respect
condemn, dannare, 17.67
condottiere, condottiere, 13.56
conduct (v.),* governare, 7.32, 9.40, 14.60. See also govern
confess, confessare, 12.51, 15.62
confidence, confidenza, 17.66; have confidence, confidare, ED.3, 26.104. See also trust; cf.
belief
conform, conformare, 14.60, 25.99; conformity, conformare, 25.100. Cf disparity; form;
unlike
conjecture, coniettura, 22.92, 25.98
conquer, conquered, vincere, 4.17, 6.24, 7.32; unconquerable, insuperabile, 13.57. See also
defeat, win; cf. victor, victory
consent (v.), consentire, acconsentire, consentimento, 3.12, 3.15 (2X), 7.27, 7.33 (2X);
consent (n.), consenso, 7.28. See also grant
conspire, coniurare, 19.72, 19.73 (4X), 19.74, 19.75; conspire, conspirare, cospirare, 8.37,
19.77, 19.80, 19.81; conspiracy, coniura, 19.72, 19.73 (2X), 19.74; conspirator,
coniuranti, 19.73 (3X)
constitute, costituire, 19.75; constitute, fare, 23.93; constitution, costituzione, 6.24. For
costituzione, see also institution; for costituire, see also establish
content, to become content, contentare, 4.18, 19.73, 20.86 (4X), 25.100; content, contento,
8.35, 19.72, 19.74 (2X); malcontent, mal contento, 3.11, 3.14, 4.18, 6.23, 8.37, 19.73 (2X).
See also bad; evil
contract, contratto, 21.90
convenience, posta, “at his convenience” for a suaposta, 9.40, 17.68 (2X); inconvenience,
inconveniente, 3.12, 21.91 (2X); incomodità, 11.46. For incomodità, see also advantage
corrupt, corrompere, 4.18 (2X), 19.77; corrupting, corruzione, 7.26; corrupter, corruttore,
17.68
council, concilio, 21.89; council, consiglio, 23.94. For consiglio, see also counsel
counsel (v.), consigliare, 23.95 (2X); take counsel, consigliarsi, 23.94, 23.95 (2X); counsel
(n.), consiglio, 8.38, 9.40, 23.95(4X); counselor, consigliere, 23.95. For consiglio, see also
council
country, countryside, paese, 3.8, 10.43, 10.44, 14.59; campagna, 25.99; provincia, 26.104.
For campagna, see also campaign; field; for paese, see also landscape; for provincia, see
also province
course * partito, 3.13 (2X), 3.14, 3.15, 13.54 (2X), 19.73, 19.76, 21.89, 21.91, 24.97. See also
policy
court (n.), iudicio, iudizio, 7.30, 18.71. See also judge
covert, copertamente, 18.69
cowardice, cowardly, viltà, vile, 12.48, 20.83. See also base
create, recreate, creare, recreare, 5.20 (3X), 7.32 (2X), 7.33, 19.77 (2X); creation, creazione,
151
7.33
credit, credito, 4.18
criminal, scellerato, 8.34; crime, scelleratezza, 8.34, 8.35, 8.36, 8.37, 9.38; of crime,
scellerato, 8.34; crimes, scelera (L), 8.34 (T)
cruel, cruelty, crudele, 7.29, 15.61, 17.65 (4X), 17.66, 17.67, 19.76, 19.80; very cruel,
crudelissimo, 19.77, 19.81; cruelty,* crudeltà, 7.30, 8.35, 8.37 (3X), 10.44, 17.65, 17.67,
19.76 (3X), 19.79, 19.81 (2X), 21.88, 26.102; cruelty, crudelitas (L), 17.65 (T)
crush, opprimere, 20.85, 21.90. See also oppress
cunning, arte, 8.36. See also art
cure (v.), curare, 3.12 (2X); cure (v.), guarire, 26.102. For curare, see also care, concern
custom, costume, 3.9 (3X), 12.51; custom, consuetudine, 20.86; customary, consueto,
usarsi,*8.36; solere, ED.3, ED.4; customarily, solere, 9.41, 17.66. For consueto, solere, see
also accustom
danger, pericolo, periculo, pericoloso, periculoso, ED.4, 4.17, 6.23, 6.24, 7.27, 7.29, 8.35 (3X),
9.41, 9.42 (3X), 12.48, 12.53, 13.54, 13.55 (4X), 13.56, 16.63, 17.66 (2X), 19.72, 19.73,
19.78, 20.83, 21.90, 23.93
day,*giornata, 12.52. See also battle
death, morte, 7.31 (2X), 7.32 (2X), 9.42, 11.47, 12.50, 17.67, 19.73, 19.75, 19.78, 19.79;
death, mors (L), 4.16 (T); death, morire, 19.77, 19.78 (2X), 19.79 (3X), 19.80 (2X). See also
die; kill
debate (v.), disputare, 2.6. See also dispute
deceive, deceived, ingannare, ingannarsi, 3.8 (2X), 7.33, 8.37, 9.41 (2X), 18.70 (3X), 19.72,
19.78, 22.92, 23.93, 23.95; deceit, inganno, 7.29, 18.70
decent, onesto, 9.39, 19.77; decency, onesta, 9.39; indecent, disoneste, 21.90. See also
honest; cf. honorable
decide, deliberare, 7.28, 8.34 (2X), 19.78, 23.94 (2X); decide, volere, 3.13, 7.27 (2X);
decision, deliberate, deliberazione, 3.14, 19.78, 19.79, 20.83, 21.89, 23.94, 23.95
deed, opera, 6.24, 7.27, 14.59 (2X), 16.63, 19.77 (2X), 20.85, 22.92. See also work
defeat (v.), rompere,*4.18, 8.35, 13.54, 20.84; defeat (v.), vincere, 4.18, 19.79, 21.89, 24.97;
defeated, battuto, 3.11, 12.52. For vincere, see also conquer; overcome; win; cf. victor;
victory
defend, difendere, defendere, 3.14, 6.24, 8.35, 8.37, 9.39, 9.41, 11.45, 11.47, 12.48, 12.50,
13.54 (2X), 13.57, 16.63, 16.64, 18.69 (2X), 18.71, 19.72, 19.73 (2X), 19.79, 20.84, 21.89,
23.93 (3X), 24.97, 26.104; defend, difensione, 10.42; defense, difesa, difendere, 8.35, 10.44
(3X), 11.46, 12.48, 14.59, 24.96, 24.97 (2X); defender, defensore 3.11, 6.23; undefended,
indifeso, 11.45
demonstrate, dimostrare, 6.23, 12.49, 25.98
deserve, meritare, 3.15 (2X); deserve, avere merito, 20.83; deserving, degno, 6.22, 7.29,
19.80; undeservedly, indegnamente, ED.4; undeserving, indegna, ED.3. For meritare,
degno, see also bought; merit; worthy; cf. indignation
desire (n.), desiderio, ED.4, 5.21, 25.100; desire (v.), desiderare, ED.3 (2X), 3.14, 4.18, 9.39
(2X), 15.61, 17.65, 22.93 (2X), 25.100
desperate, to make, desperare, 19.74. Cf. hope
152
die, morire, 4.17, 7.31 (3X), 7.32 (4X), 8.36, 9.42, 12.49, 12.50, 19.77, 20.87, 26.105; die out,
spegnere, 26.103; dead, morto, 4.19, 8.35, 8.37, 19.74. See also kill; cf. homicide
dignity, dignità, 19.78, 19.80, 21.91; dignity, dignitas (L), 21.90. Cf. disdain; indignation;
worthy
discipline, disciplina, 8.36, 12.48, 12.53, 14.58, 17.68, 18.69
discord, discordare, 25.99, 25.101
discourse (v.), discorrere, 11.45, 12.48 (2X), 12.52, 19.71; discourse (n.), discorso, 19.81,
19.82. For discorrere, see also discuss; review
discuss, discorrere, ED.4, 3.9, 4.19, 6.24, 7.27, 10.43, 11.46, 15.61, 19.75, 19.80, 20.86, 24.96,
25.99, 26.101; discussion, ragionamento, 8.36, 8.37, 25.100. For discorrere, see also
discourse; review; cf. reason
disdain, disprezzo, 19.77, 19.82; disdain, dedignazione, 19.80. Cf. dignity; indignation;
scorn; worthy
disparity, disformità, 3.9 (2X), 4.19; disparate, disforme, 3.9, 3.11, 3.13. See also unlike; cf.
conform
dispute (v.), disputare, 15.61; dispute (n.), disputa, 17.66. For disputare, see also debate
dissension, dissensione, 17.67
dissimulate, dissimulare, 7.29; dissimulator, dissimulatore, 17.66, 18.70
dominion, dominio, 1.5, 1.6, 2.7 (2X), 24.97; dominion, dominare, 3.9; dominion,
dominazione, 20.86; domination, dominio, 26.105. For imperio, see also empire; power;
cf. imperial
doubtful, dubbio, dubio, 6.23, 13.55, 21.91; without doubt, sanza, senza dubbio, 20.85,
23.95. For dubitare, see also fear; hesitate; question
dread, paura, 17.67. See also afraid; fear
duke,* duca, 2.7, 3.9, 3.13, 7.26 (2X), 7.27 (3X), 7.28 (5X), 7.29 (4X), 7.30 (2X), 7.31, 7.32,
7.33 (2X), 11.46 (4X), 11.47, 12.50, 12.51, 13.55 (2X), 14.58 (2X), 20.86, 21.90, 24.96;
duchy, ducato, 7.28, 7.29. Cf. lord; master
duty, of izio, 7.29, 8.36. See also office
effect, ef etto, 9.39, 17.67, 23.94, 25.99
effeminate, ef eminato, 6.23, 15.62, 19.72, 19.77, 20.84
efficacy, ef icacia, 18.70
elect, eleggere, 19.80; elected, eletto, 19.78 (2X), 19.82. For eleggere, see also choose
eliminate, spegnere, 2.7, 3.9 (3X), 3.10, 3.15, 4.18 (3X), 4.19 (2X), 5.21 (2X), 6.23, 6.24, 6.25,
7.26, 7.28 (2X), 7.29, 7.30, 7.31, 7.32 (2X), 8.38, 11.46 (2X), 11.47 (3X), 13.55, 13.56 (2X),
16.63, 18.69, 19.81, 25.98. See also die
emperor, imperadore, imperatore, 7.26, 10.43, 12.52, 13.54, 19.75 (3X), 19.76 (3X), 19.77,
19.78 (4X), 19.82, 23.94 (2X). Cf. command; empire; imperial; king; reign; rule
empire, imperio, 1.5, 4.19, 6.23, 7.26, 7.31, 7.32, 8.35, 12.50, 12.52, 13.57 (2X), 16.64 (2X),
17.68, 19.75 (2X), 19.77 (2X), 19.78 (2X), 19.80 (2X), 19.81 (2X). See also power; cf.
command; emperor; imperial; king; reign; rule
employ,* operare, 12.49. See also work
enslaved, stiavo, 6.23, 12.53, 26.102 (2X). Cf. servant
enterprise, impresa, 3.15, 4.18, 11.47, 12.51, 21.87, 21.88, 25.100 (2X), 26.105; undertake
153
enterprises, fare imprese, 20.85, 21.88. See also campaign; undertaking
envy, invidia, 3.11, 6.25, 7.31, 26.105
equal, equally, equale, equalmente, 9.39, 25.99; equal, retto, 7.32. For equalmente, see also
identically
err, errare, 3.10, 7.33, 17.68
error, errore, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15 (3X), 7.30, 12.51, 13.56, 17.68, 22.92, 23.93
establish,* osservare, 3.10; establish, costituire, 8.34. For osservare, see also observe; for
costituire, see also constitute
evil, male, 3.12, 3.13 (2X), 8.37, 8.38, 9.40, 10.44 (2X), 13.57, 14.58, 18.70, 19.73, 22.92. See
also bad; ill; irresolute; malcontent; cf. malignity
exalt, esaltare, 11.45. See also extol
examine, esaminare, ED.3, 3.13, 6.23, 6.24, 9.40, 10.42, 14.60, 19.79
example, esemplo, 3.12, 4.17, 6.22, 6.25 (2X), 7.26, 7.27, 7.33, 8.34, 12.52, 13.54, 13.55,
13.57, 17.65, 18.69, 18.70, 19.74, 19.75, 20.84, 20.86, 21.87, 21.88 (2X), 21.90, 21.91, 23.94,
24.96, 26.103; example, exemplum (L), 2.7, 5.20, 12.50; example, esempio, 13.54; for
example, verbigrazia, 14.59
excellent,* eccellente, 6.22, 6.23, 7.30, 8.36, 12.49, 14.60 (2X), 19.72, 21.89, 21.91, 22.92,
26.104; most excellent, eccellentissimo, 6.22, 7.30, 8.35 (2X), 19.79, 22.92
excess, eccesso, 19.73; excessive,* eccessivo, 2.7, 7.30
excuse (n.), scusa, 3.15, 25.101; excuse (v.), scusare, 20.83; escurare, 3.15, 17.68
execution, esecuzione, 17.66, 19.73
expectation, opinione, 13.54. See also opinion
experience, esperienza, ED.3, 3.8, 3.16, 6.24, 12.50, 18.69, 19.73, 26.104; experience,
practica, 14.59. For esperienza, see also experiment; test
experiment, esperienza, 26.105. See also experience; test
external, esterno, 7.29, 8.37, 19.72, 20.84. See also foreign; outside
extol, esaltare, 22.92. See also exalt
extraordinary, estraordinario, 2.7 (2X), 7.27, 16.63, 19.76, 21.88, 21.89, 26.103;
extraordinarily, estraordiamente, 16.63, 19.81. Cf. ordinary; order
faction, fazione, 11.46 (2X), 11.47
failure, infelicità, 12.49. See also happy
faith, fede, 3.15 (2X), 8.35, 12.48, 12.51, 17.65, 18.68, 18.69 (2X), 18.70 (2X), 18.71, 19.73,
20.83, 20.85, 26.105; fides (L), 18.68 (T); faithful, fedele, 3.10, 7.26, 7.28, 9.42, 15.62,
18.70, 20.83 (2X); infede, 17.65; fide, 26.104; fidele, 22.92 (2X); faithfully, confede, 20.85;
infidel, infidele, 13.55; infidelity, infidelità, 18.70; unfaithful, infedele, 7.32, 12.48,
13.55; breaker of faith, fedifrago, 15.62. Cf. trust; believe
fame, fama, 17.68, 21.88, 21.89; fama (L), 13.57. Cf. infamy
father, padre, 7.27, 7.32, 12.50, 13.56, 13.57, 17.67, 19.74, 19.80, 24.97; fatherless,
sanzapadre, 8.35; Father, Pre’, 23.94; grandfather, avolo, 19.74. Cf. maternal; mother;
parricide; patrimony
fatherland, patria, 6.23 (2X), 8.34, 8.36, 8.37, 9.38, 9.41, 26.105
fault, colpa, 7.27
favor (n.), grazia, ED.3, 4.17 (2X), 7.26, 7.33, 19.75; favor (v.), favorire, 12.51, 19.75 (3X);
154
unfavorable, non buono, 22.92. For grazia, see also grace; for favorire, favore, see also
support
fear (v.), temere, 3.10, 3.11, 4.18 (2X), 7.27, 7.32, 7.33, 9.39, 9.40 (2X), 10.43, 12.51 (2X),
12.52, 17.66 (3X), 17.67 (2X), 17.68 (2X), 19.73 (3X), 19.74, 19.79 (3X), 19.81, 21.89,
21.91, 22.93; fear (v.), dubitare, 4.18, 7.30, 7.31, 15.61; fear (n.), paura, 3.11, 6.23, 7.31,
7.33, 8.37, 12.53, 19.72, 19.73, 19.75, 19.81, 20.86 (2X), 21.91, 25.100, 25.101; fear (n.),
sospetto, 21.88; fear (n.), timore, 3.10, 10.44, 12.48, 17.67, 19.78, 21.91; feared, timeo (L),
17.65 (T); fearful, pauroso, 3.14; fearsome, pauroso, 8.37; make oneself feared, si fare
paura, 17.66; For paura, see also afraid; dread; for dubitare, see also hesitate; question
ferocious, feroce, 25.101; fierce, feroce, 15.62, 19.79; ferocity, ferocità, 7.30; ferocity, ferocia,
7.31, 19.79, 19.81, 25.100
fever, febbre, 13.57
few,* pochi, 4.17, 7.28, 8.38, 9.39, 9.41, 9.42, 12.53, 13.57, 16.63 (2X), 18.71 (4X), 19.72,
19.73, 26.104; very few, pochissimi, 7.31, 9.39, 17.65. See also little; oligarchical
field, campagna, 4.18, 4.19, 10.43, 24.97. See also campaign; country
fight (v.), combattere, 4.19, 12.51, 13.56, 19.80, 21.90; fight (v.), fare una giornata, 10.43;
fight (v.), militate, 8.36, 13.56, 17.67; fighting, militava, 8.34. For combattere, see also
battle; combat; for militare, see also soldier
fitting, conveniente, 15.61, 19.82. See also convenience; suitable
force (v.), forzare, 3.13, 6.23, 6.24 (2X), 8.38, 11.47, 16.64, 19.76, 19.77, 20.85; force (n.),
forza, 2.7, 3.8, 3.11 (2X), 3.15, 3.16, 4.18, 7.26, 7.29, 7.31 (2X), 11.46 (2X), 13.57, 18.69,
20.84, 26.104; force, vis (L), 10.42 (T), 13.57; by force, perforza, 6.24, 7.32. Cf. strength
foreign, esterno, 12.50; foreign, forestiero, 3.12; foreigner, esterno, 26.104; foreign,
forestiero, 3.11 (2X), 3.15, 11.46, 12.49, 12.52, 13.54, 20.86, 20.87 (4X). For esterno, see also
external; outside
form (n.), forma, 6.23, 26.102, 26.104. Cf. conform
former,* antiquo, 4.19, 7.28. See also ancient; antiquity; old
fortify, fortificare, 10.43 (3X). Cf. fortress; strength
fortress *fortezza, 20.83, 20.84, 20.86 (5X), 20.87 (6X); fortress, arces (L), 20.83 (T). See also
strength; cf. fortify
fortune, fortuna, ED.4 (2X), 1.6, 3.9, 6.22 (3X), 6.23, 6.25 (2X), 7.25, 7.26 (4X), 7.27 (3X),
7.28, 7.31, 7.32, 8.34 (2X), 8.35 (2X), 9.39, 9.40, 11.45, 11.46, 12.51, 13.54, 13.56, 13.57,
14.58, 14.60, 17.67, 18.70, 20.85, 21.89, 21.90, 24.97, 25.98 (3X), 25.99 (2X), 25.100,
25.101 (2X), 26.102 (2X), 26.104; fortune, fortuna (L), 7.25 (T), 25.98 (T); fortunate,
fortunata, 9.39
found (v.), fondare, 6.22, 6.23, 8.38, 9.41 (3X), 9.42, 12.48, 17.66, 17.68, 18.69, 19.75, 19.82,
23.95, 26.104; founder, fondatore, 6.23
foundation, fondamento, 6.25, 7.26, 7.27, 7.29, 7.32 (2X), 9.41 (2X), 12.48 (2X), 21.88 (2X),
26.104; great foundation, granfondamento, 7.27; to the foundation, funditus (L), 20.86
fraud, fraude, 7.32
free (adj.), libero, 1.6, 3.9, 5.20 (2X), 5.21 (2X), 12.50; very free, liberissimo, 10.43, 12.50;
freely, liberamente, 23.94; free (v.), liberare, 8.35; liberta (L), 26.101 (T); free will, libero
arbitrio, 25.98, 26.103; freedom, libero arbitrio, 23.94. Cf. liberal; liberate; liberty; will
155
frighten, sbigottire, 9.41, 11.47, 18.69. See also terrible
future, futuro, 3.8, 3.12, 7.27 (2X), 7.31, 8.36
gain,* guadagnare, 3.11, 3.13, 5.21, 7.28, 7.29, 7.30, 7.32, 8.35, 8.38, 9.40 (2X), 11.47, 20.83,
20.86; regain, riguadagnare, 3.13. See also win; cf. acquire
general, generale, 3.16, 23.95; in general, in universale, 18.71, 25.99; generally,
generalmente, 12.48, 17.66; generality, generalita, 19.71; universalità, 19.72; the people
generally, università, universale, 19.73, 19.76; generality of people, universale, 9.41,
19.75. See also community; universal
generate, generare, 7.30; generate, concepere, 20.84; regeneration, generazione, 26.105. See
also kind
gentleman, gentry, gentile uomo, 7.28 (2X), 7.31 (2X), 12.51
glory, gloria, 7.26, 8.35, 14.60, 17.68 (2X), 21.88, 24.96, 25.99, 26.103; glorify, gloriare,
14.60; glorious, glorioso, 19.82; gloriously, gloriosamente, 12.51
God, god, Dio, 6.22 (2X), 8.38, 11.45, 12.48, 25.98, 26.102 (3X), 26.103 (3X)
gold, oro, ED. 3
goodness, bontà, 11.47, 19.77
govern, governare, 2.6, 4.17 (4X), 4.18, 11.45, 12.52, 12.53, 19.74 (2X), 19.77, 21.88, 23.95,
25.98 (3X), 25.100; ungoverned, non governato, 11.45; for governing, algoverno, 19.74;
governing (n.), governi, 10.43; government, governo, ED.4, 4.17, 4.19, 7.28, 7.29, 8.37,
12.52, 15.61, 17.67, 17.68, 19.74, 19.81 (2X), 25.100; governor, governatore, 23.95. For
governare, see also conduct; for governo, see also arrangements
grace, grazia, 6.22. See also favor; grateful
grant, consentire, 7.28. See also consent
grateful, conoscente, 19.79; grado, 8.38; ungrateful, ingrato, 17.66; ingratitude,
ingratitudine, 19.79, 21.90. For grado, see also rank
grave, grave, 8.36, 15.62, 19.79; grave one, gravo, 3.10; gravity, gravità, ED.4, 19.72. See
also burden; slow
happy, felice, 6.23 (2X), 6.25, 11.45, 19.82, 25.99, 25.100, 25.101; happy, felicitando, 25.100;
happily, felicemente, 19.78; unhappy, infelice, 19.82, 25.99, 25.101; unhappiness,
infelicità, 14.58; be happy (v.), felicitate, 25.99 (2X). For infelicità, see also failure
hate, odiare, 10.43, 17.67, 19.73 (2X), 19.76 (2X), 19.77, 19.79, 19.80, 20.87 (3X); hate, avere
in odio, 20.87; make hated, fare odiare, 2.7, 10.44, 19.75; hate, fare odioso, 16.63, 19.72,
19.80; hated, odioso, 16.65; hatred, odio, 5.21, 7.30, 7.33, 16.65 (2X), 17.67, 17.68, 19.74,
19.75, 19.76, 19.77 (3X), 19.79, 19.81, 19.82, 20.83, 20.87; hatred, odio (L.), 19.71 (T);
hateful, odioso, 7.30, 16.65, 19.72; most hateful, odiosissimo, 19.79
head, capo*, 3.11, 4.18, 6.23, 7.28, 7.29, 11.47, 12.50, 13.55, 13.56, 19.78, 26.102, 26.103,
26.104 (2X)
heart, core, 9.41; heart, cor, 26.105
heir, erede, 11.47, 19.82. Cf. hereditary
hereditary, ereditario, hereditario, 1.5 (2X), 2.6, 19.77, 19.80, 19.82 (3X), 20.85, 24.96;
hereditary, hereditariis (L), 2.6 (T). See also heir; cf. right, hereditary
hesitate, dubitare, 10.44, 13.55; hesitation, rispetto, respetto, 3.10, 10.43, 15.62, 17.66,
21.89, 23.95; hesitant, respettivo, 3.8; hesitant, con respetto, 7.33. For dubitare, see also
156
doubtful; fear; question; for rispetto, respetto, see also concern; regard; respect
history, istoria, 13.54, 14.60, 20.84
Holiness, Santità, 11.47
homage, servitù, ED.3; homage, ossequio, 26.105. Cf. servant
homicide, omicidio, 8.37, 19.74. Cf. die; kill
honest, intern, 15.62, 18.70; total, intero, 13.55; honesty, integrità, 18.70; honestly, con
integrità, 18.68
honor (n.), onore, 8.36 (2X), 9.40, 19.72, 22.93 (3X), 26.102, 26.103; honorable, onorevole,
8.36, 18.71; honor (v.), onorare, ED.4, 6.25, 7.28, 9.40, 12.53, 21.88, 21.91, 22.93, 26.101,
26.104; honorably, onoratamente, 8.36 (2X); most honorably, onoratissimo, 19.77
hope (v.), to put hope in, sperare, 4.18 (4X), 9.40, 11.47, 19.73 (2X), 22.92, 24.97, 26.102,
26.103; hope (n.), speranza, 10.44, 26.105; spes (L), 26.103. Cf. desperate
horse, cavallo, ED.3, 7.29, 12.53, 19.81, 26.104, 26.105; horseman, cavallo, 8.36; on horse, a
cavallo, 8.37. Cf. cavalry
human, umano, 11.45, 15.62, 25.98, 25.100; human, humanus (L), 25.98 (T); inhuman,
inumano, 17.67. See also humane
humane, umano, 15.62, 18.70, 19.76; humanity, umanità, ED.3, 14.60, 17.66, 18.70 (2X),
21.91; inhumanity, inumanità, 8.35. See also human
humor, umore, 9.39, 19.76, 19.77
hurt,* of endere, 3.15, 8.37, 13.55, 16.63, 17.66 (2X), 19.79, 20.86; unhurt, inof eso, 3.10. See
also attack; offend
identically, equalmente, 25.99. See also equal
idle, idly, ozioso, 10.44, 14.60. See also leisure
illness, male, 3.12; ill, male, 6.24, 12.48, 21.89
imagine, imaginare, 15.61 (2X); imagination, imaginazione, 15.61
imitate, imitare, 6.22 (2X), 7.29, 8.34, 14.60 (3X), 19.78, 19.82 (3X); imitation, imitazione,
6.22, 14.60; to be imitated, imitabile, 7.32
imperial, imperiale, 19.80 (2X). Cf. command; emperor; empire; imperial; king; reign;
rule
impetuosity, impeto, 25.99, 25.100 (2X); impetuous,* impetuoso, 25.99, 25.100, 25.101;
impetuously, impetuosamente, 25.100; impetus, impeto, 25.98 (3X). See also thrust,
uprising
indignation, sdegno, 19.81. See also disdain; scorn; cf. dignity; worthy
industry, industria, 2.6, 3.9, 3.12, 3.16, 10.43, 12.53 (2X), 14.60, 19.76
infamy, infamia, 14.58, 15.62 (2X), 16.63 (2X), 16.65 (2X), 17.65, 19.72. Cf. fame
infantry, fanteria, 12.53, 13.56 (2X), 26.104, 26.105 (3X); infantry, fanto, 3.10, 12.53 (2X),
13.56, 19.81, 26.104, 26.105
infinite, infinite, 3.8, 3.11, 4.18, 7.29, 8.35, 8.37, 11.47, 16.63, 17.67 (2X), 18.69, 19.73, 19.74
(2X), 19.79
injure, iniuriare, 19.76, 25.100; injury, iniuria, 3.8, 7.33, 8.38 (2X), 9.39, 19.78, 19.79
innovate, innovate, 4.18, 21.88; innovation, innovazione, 2.7; innovator, innovatore, 6.24.
See also new; cf. renew
insolent, insolente, 19.76; insolence, insolenzia, 7.29, 17.68, 19.75, 19.76, 24.97
157
inspire, animare, 9.4, 21.91. See also spirit
instability, variazioni, 3.7; unstable, instabile, 7.26; unstable, instabile (L), 13.57. For
variazione, see also change; variation
institution, costituzione, 19.74; institution, ordine, 10.44
insult, insolenzia, 26.102. See also insolence; cf. blame
intent, animo, 7.29, 7.30, 19.73; intent, intento, 11.46, 15.61; intention, intenzione, 7.32,
12.49. See also mind; spirit; cf. magnanimous; pusillanimous
internal, intrinseca, 20.86
irresolute, mal resoluto, 21.90. For male, see also evil
judge (v.), giudicare, ED.3; judge (v.), iudicare, 7.27, 7.29, 7.30, 7.32, 8.34, 8.35, 8.38, 10.43
(2X), 12.52, 13.55 (2X), 18.71 (2X), 19.75, 19.77, 19.78, 20.83, 20.85, 20.86, 22.92, 25.98
(2X), 25.100, 25.101, 26.102; without a trial, iniudicato, 19.77; judge (n.), indice, 19.75;
judgment, iudicio, 22.92; iudizio, 22.92; sentenzia, 13.57, 19.72, 20.83. For iudizio, iudicio,
see also court; cf. just
just, iusto, 26.103, 26.105; iustus (L), 26.103; justice, giustizia, 21.90; justice, iustizia,
19.76, 26.103; justification, iustificazione, 17.67. For iusto, see also adequate; cf. judge
kill, ammazzare, 7.31, 8.35, 8.37, 12.52, 12.53, 19.74 (2X), 19.77, 19.79 (2X), 19.81; be
killed, morire, 19.75; be killed, uccidere, 8.34; killing (n.), occisione, 17.65, 19.79. For
morire, see also die; cf. homicide
kind* (n.), generazione, 17.67, 18.69, 22.92; kind* (n.), genera (L), 1.5 (T), 12.48 (T); kind*
(n.), qualità, 11.45, 16.63, 19.78; ragione, 7.29 (2X); diverse kinds, diversità, 4.17. For
generazione, see also generate; for qualità, see also quality; for ragione, see also reason
king, re, 1.6, 3.13 (2X), 3.14 (4X), 3.15, 4.17 (3X), 6.23, 7.28 (3X), 7.30 (2X), 7.33, 8.34, 11.45
(2X), 11.46, 12.49, 12.50, 13.54, 16.63, 16.64, 19.74, 19.75 (3X), 21.88 (3X), 24.96, 25.100
(3X), 25.101; of being a king, regnandum (L.), 6.25; King, re, 3.13 (2X), 3.15, 3.16, 7.28,
13.56 (2X); kingdom, regno, 1.6, 3.12, 3.14 (2X), 3.15, 4.17 (2X), 4.18 (4X), 4.19 (2X),
6.22, 7.30, 7.31, 7.33, 12.50, 12.51, 13.56 (2X), 13.57, 19.74 (2X), 19.75, 19.81, 19.82,
21.88, 24.97, 25.100; kingdom, regnum (L.), 4.16 (T), 6.25, 17.66; kingdom, Reame,
26.102; kingly, regio, 7.29. Cf. queen
knowledge,* cognizione, ED.3, 14.59 (4X)
land, terra, 3.14, 17.67; on land, in terra, 12.51 (3X). See also town
landscape, paese, ED.4. See also country; cf. land
language, lingua, 3.9 (3X), 15.61
lasciviousness, lascivo, 15.62
law, legge, 3.9, 5.20 (3X), 6.23, 12.48 (4X), 12.50, 18.69, 19.73, 24.96, 26.104; legibus (L),
5.20 (T)
lead,* governare, 3.12, 7.32, 9.40, 12.53, 14.60, 17.67. See also conduct; govern
legate, legato, 17.68 (2X), 21.89 (2X)
leisure, ozioso, 4.19, 21.88. See also idle
liberal, liberale, 7.32, 15.61, 16.62, 16.63, 16.64 (3X); very liberal, liberalissimo, 16.64;
liberality, liberalità, 14.60, 16.62, 16.63 (2X), 16.64 (5X), 16.65; liberality, del liberale,
16.63 (4X), 16.65; liberality, liberalitate (L.), 16.62 (T). Cf. free; liberty; liberate; will
liberate, liberare, 9.41, 13.56. Cf. free; liberal; liberty; will
158
liberty, libertà, 5.20, 5.21 (2X), 8.36, 9.39, 12.50, 19.74. Cf. free; liberal; liberate; will
license, licenzia, 9.39, 17.68; in license, licenziosamente, 19.77; licentious, licenzioso, 19.80.
See also wanton
life, vita, 5.21, 6.23, 7.32, 8.34, 10.43, 11.46, 14.60 (2X), 17.66, 19.75, 19.76, 19.77, 19.79,
25.101, 26.103; sangue, 17.67 (2X). For sangue, see also blood
little, pochi, 8.35. See also few; oligarchical
live freely, vivere libero, 3.9, 5.20, 5.21 (2X)
lord, signore, 1.5, 3.8 (2X), 3.13, 3.14 (2X), 3.15, 4.17 (5X), 4.18, 4.19, 7.27, 7.29, 7.31 (3X),
11.45, 18.69, 19.81, 19.82 (2X), 22.92, 24.96; become lord, insignorirsi, 7.27, 19.78. See
also Signor; cf. master
love (n.), amore, 4.17, 12.48, 17.66, 17.67, 21.90, 26.105; love (n.), carità, 10.44; love (v.),
amare, 2.7, 3.10, 4.17, 7.32, 9.40, 17.66 (3X), 17.68 (2X), 19.76 (3X), 19.79; love, amari (L),
17.65 (T); lover, amatore, 19.76, 21.91. For carità, see also charity
Madonna, madonna, 3.13. Cf. woman
magistracy, magistrate, magistrato, 8.37, 9.41, 9.42 (3X)
magnanimous, magnanimo, 7.32. Cf. intent; pusillanimous; spirit
magnificent, magnifico, ED.3 (T), ED.3 (2X), ED.4 (3X)
majesty, maestà, 18.71, 19.73, 19.80, 21.91, 23.94
malcontent, mal contento, 3.11, 19.73 (2X). For contento, see also content; for male, see also
evil
malignity, malignità, ED.4, 7.27. Cf. bad; evil
man, uomo, passim.; men, gente, 7.28, 8.35, 13.54; men-at-arms, gente d’arme, 3.8, 3.10,
3.11, 13.56 (2X); men, wise, savi, 3.13. For gente, see also troops
manage, maneggiare, 3.13, 6.23, 9.39, 10.43, 13.55, 16.64, 20.85
manoeuvers, maneggi, 26.103
marriage, matrimonio, 3.15, 7.28
marvel (v.) maravigliare, 4.16, 4.19, 6.21, 19.79; marvel (n.), maraviglia, 26.103;
marvelous, maraviglioso, 19.79, 26.103
master (n.), maestro, 8.37. Cf. Signor; lord
maternal, materno, 8.35. Cf. mother; father
matter, materia, ED.4, 3.16, 6.23, 7.29, 15.61, 19.73, 19.74 (2X), 19.82, 20.83, 20.85, 21.89,
26.102, 26.104
medicine, medicina, 3.8, 3.12
memory, memoria, 2.7, 4.17, 4.19 (2X), 5.21, 7.26, 11.45, 13.56, 17.68, 19.74
mercenary, mercenario, 12.48 (3X), 12.49 (3X), 12.50 (3X), 12.52, 13.54, 13.55 (4X), 13.56,
(3X), 13.57, 20.84; mercenary, mercenariis (L), 12.48 (T)
mercy,* pietà, 8.35, 17.65 (2X), 17.68, 18.70; mercy, pietate, 17.65; merciful, pietoso, 15.62,
17.65 (3X), 18.70. For pietà, see also piety
merit, merito (n.) 3.12, 8.34. Cf. deserve; worthy
military, militare, 8.37, 10.44, 12.53, 17.68, 19.76, 19.79, 24.97, 26.103; military, milizia,
6.25, 7.32, 8.34, 8.35, 8.36 (2X), 12.52, 13.56, 14.58, 17.68, 20.84, 21.88; military, militae,
12.48; military, militibus (L), 12.52; military, militiam (L), 14.58 (T). For militare, see also
fight; soldier; for militibus (L), see also soldier
159
mind, animo, 7.28 (2X), 21.88 (2X); mind, mente, 11.45, 14.59, 14.60. For animo, see also
spirit; intent; cf. magnanimous; pusillanimous
minister, ministro (n.), 4.17 (2X), 7.30, 22.92 (5X), 22.93 (6X). Cf. administer
miracle, miracolo, 3.16; miraculous, miracoloso, 12.52
mixed, misto, 3.7, 12.48 (2X), 13.56, 17.67; mixed, mixtus (L), 13.54 (T); mixed, mixtis (L),
3.7 (T)
mode, modo, passim; his own mode, a suo modo, 23.94 (2X), 25.101. See also suitable
modern, moderno, ED.3, 8.34, 18.69, 20.86.23.94
monarchy, monarchia, 4.17. Cf. king; queen
mother, madre, 19.77. Cf. father; maternal
multitude, moltitudine, 4.17, 6.24, 17.67
name (v.), nominare, 13.55, 13.57, 18.71, 26.103; name (v.), prenominare, 12.48, 19.82,
26.103; name (n.), nome, 5.21 (2X), 16.63 (4X), 16.64, 16.65 (3X), 17.65, 17.66, 17.67 (2X)
nature,* natura, ED.4 (2X), 4.18, 6.24, 7.26, 7.30, 10.44, 14.59 (2X), 17.68 (2X), 18.69, 18.70,
19.76, 19.78, 23.95, 25.99, 25.100 (3X); natural, naturale, 2.7, 3.7, 3.8, 3.14, 4.17, 9.40,
20.86; naturally, naturalmente, 2.7
necessary, necessario, 3.10, 3.15, 4.18, 4.19, 6.23, 6.24, 7.27, 7.29, 7.30, 7.32, 8.36, 8.38, 9.39,
9.41, 12.48, 14.59, 15.61, 15.62, 16.63, 16.64 (2X), 17.67, 18.69, 18.70 (4X), 19.73, 19.75,
19.76, 19.78, 19.81 (3X), 19.82 (2X), 20.83, 20.84 (3X), 20.85, 25.101, 26.102 (2X), 26.104
(2X); necessary, necessarium (L), 26.103; be necessary, necessitare, 3.14, 7.31, 8.34, 8.35,
8.38, 9.40, 10.43, 12.52, 16.63, 16.65, 18.69, 18.70 (2X), 19.79; necessity, necessità, 2.7,
3.7, 3.15, 8.35, 8.38 (2X), 10.42, 10.43, 12.48, 13.56, 15.61, 18.70, 20.85, 21.90, 22.92, 23.95
nephew, nipote, 8.36
neutral, neutrale, 21.89 (2X), 21.90
neutrality, neutralità, 21.90
new, nuovo, passim. Cf. innovate
noble, nobile, 12.52; ennobled, nobilitato, 6.23, 26.105; nobility, nobilità, 17.66
oath, giuramento, 18.70
obey, obedire, 4.17, 5.21, 8.37, 9.39, 9.42 (2X), 10.43, 12.51, 14.58, 18.70, 26.104; bring to
obey, viene alla obedienza, 12.50; resolved to obey, alla obedienzia, 13.55; obedience,
obedienza, 7.29, 26.105
oblige, obligate, obligare, 13.56, 22.93, 24.96; obligation, obligo, 7.33, 8.34, 10.44, 17.66,
20.83, 21.90; obligated, obligate, 3.8, 4.18, 20.83; be obligated, obligarsi, 9.40 (5X),
10.44; obliged, obligato, 13.57; release (v.), disobligare, 11.46. See also pledge
observe, osservare, 3.11, 3.14, 3.16 (3X), 6.24, 8.38, 14.60, 15.62, 18.69 (3X), 18.70 (3X),
18.71, 19.73, 24.96 (2X); observance, osservanzia, 18.69. For osservare, see also establish
obstinate, ostinato, 19.73, 19.79, 23.94, 25.101, 26.104, 26.105
offend, of endere, 2.7, 3.8 (2X), 3.10 (4X), 3.11, 7.32, 7.33 (4X), 8.38, 13.55, 16.63, 17.66,
19.73, 20.83, 23.94; offense, of esa, 3.10 (2X), 8.38, 12.48. See also attack, hurt
office, of izio, 11.45, 12.49; official (n.), of iciate, 3.10; official (n.), of iziale, 4.17. For
of izio, see also duty
old, vecchio, 3.9, 5.21, 6.23, 6.25, 7.33, 12.48, 13.56, 19.77, 19.82 (2X), 20.84; old, antiquo,
7.32; old, antico, 6.25; grown old, antiquato, 11.45, 24.96. For antiquo, antico, see also
160
ancient
oligarchical, dipochi, 5.20 (2X). For pochi, see also few; little
opinion, opinione, 3.8, 9.41, 13.57, 14.60, 18.71, 19.72 (2X), 19.75, 19.80, 20.83, 20.85, 23.94,
23.95, 25.98 (3X). See also expectation; cf. believe; reputation; trust
opportunity, occasione, 3.8, 4.18, 6.23 (5X), 6.24, 6.25, 7.28, 7.30, 7.31, 9.39, 11.47, 13.55,
17.67, 20.84, 20.85, 21.89, 26.102, 26.103, 26.105
oppress, opprimere, 4.18, 6.23, 6.25, 9.39 (4X), 9.40, 9.41, 12.49 (2X), 12.50 (2X), 12.52,
26.102; oppressed, oppressato, 26.102. See also crush
order (n.), ordine, passim; order (v.), ordinare, passim; disorder,* disordine, 3.10, 3.15, 4.18,
17.65, 20.87; disorder,* discordia, 11.47; disorder (v.), disordinare, 7.27. For ordine, see
also institution
ordinance, ordinanza, 13.56
ordinary, ordinario, 2.6, 3.8, 3.14, 3.16; ordinary, per l’ordinario, 12.49; ordinarily, per
ordinario, 19.73
outside, externo, 26.105; outsider, esterno, 3.10. See also external; foreign
overcome, superare, 6.24 (2X), 7.29, 8.35, 10.44, 12.50, 18.69, 20.85 (2X), 26.104; overcome,
vincere, 4.18. For vincere, see also conquer; win
parricide, parricida, 8.37. Cf. father; patrimony
parsimony, parsimonia (L), 16.62 (T); parsimony, parsimonia, 16.63, 16.64
partisan, partigiano, 7.29, 20.83, 20.84; partisan, del parte, 7.28; with partisan zeal,
partigianamente, 6.24
party, parte* 7.28, 7.31, 11.47 (3X), 13.55, 20.84 (3X)
past (n.), adrieto, 12.50, 14.60; preceding (n.), adrieto, 25.99; above, della passata, 11.46;
past ones, le passate, 24.96; past (adj.), passato, 7.30; last, passato, 26.104; pass, passare,
8.36; come, passare, 21.89
path, via, 5.21, 6.22 (3X), 6.23, 6.24, 7.25, 7.27, 8.34, 11.47, 16.64, 25.100. Cf. way
patrimony, patrimonio, 8.36, 17.67. Cf. father; parricide
patron, patrone, 5.20, 12.49, 12.50
peace, pace, 6.23, 12.48, 14.59 (2X), 17.65, 18.71, 20.85; to peace, pacifica, 7.29 (2X); peace
treaty, pace, 18.69; bring to peace, pacare, 19.79; peaceful, pacifico, 8.37, 14.60
people, populo, passim; people, universale, 9.41, 19.73, 19.75, 19.76
perform, operare, 12.51
philosopher, filosofo, 19.75
physician, fisico, 3.12
piety, pietà, 26.105; pious, pietoso, 21.88; pious, pia (L), 26.103. See also mercy
plan (v.), disegnare, 6.22, 7.31, 20.86, 23.95; sketch, disegnare, ED.4; plan (n.), disegno,
6.22, 7.32, 8.34, 23.94, 25.99; according to plan, a proposito, 20.84; purpose, proposito,
13.55; regard, proposito, 23.94
pleasure* (n.), piacere, 21.89
plebs, plebe, 10.43 (2X), 12.51
pledge (v.), obligare, 3.15. See also oblige
poison (n.), veleno, 13.57
policy, partito, 8.35, 19.80; policy, parte*, 3.11, 3.12, 9.38; policy, termine* 23.94
161
pontiff, pontefïce, 7.33, 11.46 (2X), 25.100, 25.101; pontificate, pontificato, 11.46, 11.47,
19.82. Cf. pope
poor, povero, 3.10 (2X), 16.63, 16.64, 16.65; poverty, poverta, 16.65
pope, papa, 2.7, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 7.27, 7.28, 7.31 (3X), 7.32, 7.33 (4X), 8.37, 11.45, 11.46 (7X),
11.47, 12.52, 13.54 (2X), 16.63, 21.91, 25.100; papacy, papato, 7.33, 16.63. Cf. pontiff
power, potenzia, 3.12 (2X), 3.15, 3.16, 4.19, 5.20, 7.27, 7.29, 7.31, 7.33, 25.98; power,
potestà, 7.29; power, potente, 3.11 (4X), 3.12 (2X), 3.15 (2X), 10.43, 11.46, 13.54, 21.8;
power, potentato, 11.45 (3X), 19.72; power, potentiae (L), 13.57; power, imperio, 11.45,
19.79, 21.88; powerful, potente, 3.11 (5X), 3.12, 3.15 (2X), 3.16 (2X), 6.25, 7.30, 7.31,
10.44, 11.45, 11.47, 19.73, 19.75, 19.76, 20.84, 21.90 (2X); impotent, impotente, 7.29. For
imperio, see also empire
praetor, pretore, 8.34; praetorian, pretoriani, 19.78
praise (v.), laudare, 3.14, 14.60, 18.71, 20.86, 20.87; praise (v.), laudantur (L), 15.61 (T);
praise (n.), laude, 11.47, 14.59, 15.61, 19.77; praiseworthy, laudabile, 15.62, 18.68
pray, pregare, 26.102. See also beg
preach, predicare, 18.71
prelate, prelato, 11.47
prepare, preparare, 7.26, 21.91, 26.104; preparation, preparazione, 9.41, 17.66
pretext, colore, 19.78. See also color
priest, prete, 12.52
prince,* principe, ED.3, ED.4 (3X), 1.5 (2X), 1.6, 2.6 (2X), 2.7, 3.8 (2X), 3.9 (2X), 3.10, 3.12,
3.16, 4.17 (4X), 4.18 (3X), 5.20, 5.21 (3X), 6.21, 6.22 (4X), 6.23, 6.25 (2X), 7.25, 7.26 (4X),
7.27, 7.32, 8.34 (3X), 8.37, 8.38, 9.38, 9.39 (5X), 9.40 (5X), 9.41 (3X), 9.42 (4X), 10.42,
10.43, 10.44 (6X), 11.45, 12.48 (2X), 12.49 (3X), 12.50 (2X), 12.52, 13.55, 13.57, 14.58
(5X), 14.59 (2X), 14.60 (2X), 15.61 (4X), 15.62, 16.63 (2X), 16.64 (5X), 16.65, 17.65 (2X),
17.66 (4X), 17.67 (3X), 17.68 (2X), 18.68, 18.69 (7X), 18.70 (5X), 18.71 (3X), 19.71, 19.72
(3X), 19.73 (5X), 19.74 (4X), 19.75 (2X), 19.76 (4X), 19.77, 19.78 (2X), 19.79 (2X), 19.81
(3X), 19.82 (4X), 20.83 (2X), 20.84 (2X), 20.85 (8X), 20.86 (3X), 20.87, 21.87, 21.88 (2X),
21.89 (2X), 21.90 (4X), 21.91 (2X), 22.92 (3X), 22.93 (3X), 23.93, 23.94, 23.95 (6X), 24.96
(3X), 24.97, 25.99 (2X), 26.101, 26.102 (2X), 26.104, 26.105; prince, principem (L), 14.58
(T), 21.87 (T); princes, principes (L), 15.61 (T), 22.92 (T), 24.96 (T); princes, principibus
(L), 18.68 (T), 20.83 (T)
principality,*principato, 1.5 (2X), 2.6 (2X), 3.7, 3.8 (2X), 3.9, 4.17, 4.19, 6.21, 6.22, 6.23
(2X), 7.32, 8.34, 8.35 (2X), 8.37, 9.39 (6X), 9.40, 9.41, 10.42, 11.45 (2X), 12.48, 13.57 (2X),
15.61, 16.64, 19.73, 19.76, 19.80 (2X), 19.82 (5X), 20.84, 20.85 (2X), 24.96, 24.97;
principality, principatus (L), 1.5 (T), 2.6 (T), 3.7 (T), 5.20 (T), 6.21 (T), 7.25 (T), 8.34 (T),
9.38 (T), 10.42 (T), 11.45 (T); principal, principale, 11.46, 12.48, 17.67; principate,
principato, 19.76, 19.82
progress, progresso, 3.12, 12.49, 12.50, 12.51, 12.52. See also step
property,* roba, 17.66, 17.67 (3X), 19.72 (2X). Cf. belongings
proportion, proporzione, 6.25, 14.58
protection, difesa, 19.73
proud, superbo, 15.62
162
proverb, proverbio, 9.41
province,*provincia, 3.9 (2X), 3.10, 3.11 (4X), 3.12 (3X), 3.13 (2X), 3.14, 3.16, 4.17, 4.19,
5.20, 5.21, 7.29, 7.30, 11.45, 14.59 (2X), 19.81, 20.86, 26.105; inhabitant of a province,
provinciale, 3.8, 3.11. For provincia, see also country
prudence, prudenzia, 3.13, 13.57, 17.66, 21.90, 21.91, 22.92, 23.95 (2X), 24.96, 25.98,
25.101; prudent, prudente, 3.12, 6.22 (2X), 7.27, 10.44, 15.62, 16.63, 18.69, 19.75, 23.94
(2X), 25.100, 26.102; most prudent, prudentissimo, 12.51; very prudent, prudentissimo,
23.93, 23.95; prudently, prudentemente, 24.96
public (adj.), publico, 10.43; public (n.), pubblico, 10.43
punish, punire, 3.9, 19.79, 21.89; punishment, pena, 12.49, 17.67, 19.73
purge, purgare, 7.30
pusillanimous, pusillanimo, 15.62, 19.72; pusillanimity, pusillanimità, 9.40. Cf. intent;
magnanimous
quality, qualità, ED.4, 6.25, 7.28, 9.42, 10.42, 12.47, 15.61, 16.62, 17.65, 17.68, 18.70 (2X),
18.71, 19.71, 19.77, 19.80, 19.85, 20.84, 20.85, 21.88, 21.90, 21.91, 25.99 (3X)
quarrel, scandolo, 11.46
queen, regina, 12.50
question (v.), dubitare, 8.37. See also doubtful; fear; hesitate
rank, grado, 4.17, 7.26, 8.34 (3X), 8.35, 8.36, 9.40, 14.58, 16.64, 19.82, 22.92; not translated,
7.26. For grado, see also favor; grateful
ransom, taglia, 12.53, 16.64. Cf. taxes
rapacious, rapace, 19.72; rapine, rapina, 15.61, 17.67. See also robbery
read, leggere, ED.4, 14.60 (2X), 19.75; reading, lezione, ED.3. Cf. write
reason* (n.), ragione, 4.18 (3X), 4.19, 14.60, 20.84, 21.89, 21.91; reason (v.), ragionare, 2.6,
6.22, 8.34, 11.45, 12.48, 14.59, 19.81; reasonable, ragionevole, 2.7, 3.15, 3.16, 4.17, 7.26,
14.58; reasonably, ragionevolmente, 10.44; reasoning, ragionare, 2.6, 12.48. For ragione,
see also kind; cf. discussion
rebel (v.), rebellare, 3.8, 4.17, 17.68, 19.81; rebel (v.), defecit (L), 4.16 (T); rebellion,
rebellione, 3.8, 4.18, 4.19, 5.21, 7.28
regard,* respetto, 7.31. See also caution; concern; respect
reign (v.), regnare, 8.35; reign (n.), regno, 21.88. See also rule; cf. command; empire;
emperor; imperial; king
religion, religione, 8.35, 11.45, 18.70 (2X), 21.88; religious, religioso, 15.62, 18.70. Cf. sect
remedy (n.), remedio, 3.9, 3.10 (3X), 3.12, 7.31, 7.32, 8.38, 9.41, 10.44, 12.51, 14.60, 19.73,
24.97, 25.98, 26.105; remedy (v.), rimediare, 3.10, 3.12 (2X)
renew, rinnovare, 8.38. Cf. innovate
republic,* republica, 1.5, 2.6, 5.21, 8.34 (2X), 12.49 (2X), 12.50 (2X), 12.52, 13.57, 15.61
reputation,* repute, reputazione, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 7.28, 7.29 (2X), 7.31, 9.39 (2X), 9.40,
10.44, 12.51 (2X), 12.52 (3X), 12.53 (3X), 13.55, 13.56, 16.64, 18.71, 19.76, 19.79, 20.85,
21.88, 26.105; reputed, reputarsi, 22.92; reputed, reputato, 19.72 (2X), 19.76. Cf. believe;
fame; opinion
respect, rispetto, 4.17; respect, respetto, 3.11, 19.82, 21.90, 24.97. See also concern; hesitate;
regard
163
revenge, vendetta, 3.11, 5.21, 26.105. Cf. avenge
revere, reverire, 7.32, 19.72, 19.79, 26.104; reverence, riverenzia, 23.94; reverent, reverente,
19.78
review (v.), discorrere, 8.38, 13.57, 19.77, 20.86. See also discourse; discuss
reward (n.), premio, 21.91; reward (v.), premiare, 16.63, 21.89
rich, ricco, 8.34, 22.93; riches, ricchezze, 25.99. See also wealth
right, hereditary, iure hereditario, 19.77, 19.80, 19.82. For hereditario, see also hereditary;
for iure, cf. just
robbery, rapina, 17.66, 19.79; robbery, latrocinio, 7.29. For rapina, see also rapine; violence
rule (v.), reggere, 10.42, 10.43, 19.74, 20.84, 20.85; rule (v.), regnare, 16.64, 19.78; rule (n.),
regola, 3.14, 3.16, 9.40, 23.95; give rules, regolare, ED.4. For regnare, see also reign; cf.
command; emperor; empire; imperial; king
sad, tristo, 13.54
safe, securo, sicuro, 13.55, 17.66, 21.91, 26.105. See also secure
satisfy, satisfare, 3.8, 3.10, 7.30, 9.39, 19.73 (2X), 19.74, 19.76 (2X), 19.77, 19.78 (2X), 19.80,
19.81 (3X); satisfaction, satisfazione, 21.89
scorn (n.), sdegno, 14.58. See also indignation; cf. dignity; disdain
secret, secreto, 8.37 (2X); secretive, secreto, 23.94; secretly, secretamente, 8.36, 19.73;
secretary, secretis (L), 22.92 (T)
secure, securo, sicuro, 3.10, 3.14, 4.19 (2X), 5.20, 5.21, 6.25, 7.32, 8.37 (2X), 11.45, 12.48,
13.57, 14.58, 20.86, 20.87, 24.96; secure, assicurato, 7.30; securely, securamente,
sicuramente, 3.9, 7.27, 12.51, 20.83, 20.86; security, securtà, sicurtà, 6.23, 7.26, 15.62,
19.74, 19.75, 19.81, 20.83, 20.85, 24.97; secure (v.), assicurare, 3.8, 3.14, 5.21, 7.29, 7.30,
7.31, 7.32, 8.38 (3X), 9.39 (2X), 9.41, 10.44, 12.52, 19.73, 19.75, 24.96, 24.97; secure (v.),
prendere, 12.51. See also safe
Senate, Senato, 8.34, 17.68 (3X), 19.78 (3X), 19.79, 19.81; senator, senatore, 8.34. Cf. father
servant, servo, 4.17 (3X); servant, servidore, 8.36; servant, servitore, 14.58; service, servizio,
19.80; servile, servo, 26.102; servile, servile, 8.36; servitude, servitù, 5.21, 6.23, 8.36,
13.55. Cf. enslaved, homage
shadow, ombra, 9.39
shame, vergogna, 10.44, 24.96
Signor,* signor, 7.29. See also lord; cf. master
sin* (n.), peccato, 12.49 (2X)
site, sito, 14.59 (4X)
slow, grave, 17.66. See also grave
soldier (v.), militare, 8.36. See also fight
son, figliuolo, 3.16, 7.27, 8.37, 13.56, 14.58, 19.74, 19.75 (2X), 19.79, 19.80, 19.82. For
figliuolo, see also child
sort, sorte, 26.102. See also chance
spare, perdonare, 19.78
spirit, animo, ED.4, 3.15, 6.23, 7.30, 7.32, 8.34, 8.35, 8.36, 9.40, 9.41, 10.44 (3X), 13.56,
17.66, 18.70 (2X), 19.73, 19.75, 19.76, 19.79, 19.80, 26.102, 26.105; spirit, spirito, 26.102;
spirited, animoso, 8.35, 10.44, 11.46, 15.62; spiritedness, animosità, 19.72. For animo, see
164
also intent; mind; cf. magnanimous; pusillanimous; for animare, see also inspire
spiritual, spirituale, 3.14. Cf. spirit
spokesmen, oratori, 21.89
state,* stato, ED.4, 1.5 (2X), 2.6, 2.7, 3.9 (3X), 3.10 (4X), 3.11 (3X), 3.12 (3X), 3.13 (2X), 3.15,
3.16, 4.16, 4.17 (6X), 4.18 (3X), 4.19 (4X), 5.20 (4X), 6.21, 6.22, 6.23, 7.26 (2X), 7.27 (5X),
7.31, 8.37, 8.38 (2X), 9.41, 9.42 (4X), 10.42, 11.45 (3X), 11.46, 12.48 (3X), 12.51, 12.52,
12.53, 14.58, 15.62 (2X), 17.66, 18.70, 18.71 (3X), 19.73, 19.74 (2X), 19.77, 19.78, 19.79,
19.82 (4X), 20.83 (3X), 20.84 (5X), 20.85 (2X), 20.86 (6X), 20.87 (2X), 21.88, 21.91 (2X),
22.93, 23.94, 23.95, 24.96 (3X), 24.97; new states, nuovi,* 2.6; state, regnum (L), 24.96 (T)
step, progresso, 3.13, 7.27. See also progress
storm, tempesta, 24.97
strength, fortezza, 19.72, 19.81; strength, virtu, 6.22. For fortezza, see also fortress; for
virtu, see also virtue
stroke, tratto, 8.37 (2X), 8.38, 12.50
stupified, stupido, 7.30, 19.78
successor, successore, 4.17, 4.19, 7.31; successor, successoribus (L), 4.16 (T)
suitable, conveniente, 10.43, 17.67, 19.74, 21.91, 25.99; to suit himself, a suo modo, 7.30,
7.33, 9.39. See also convenience; fitting
support (n.), favore, 3.8, 3.11, 8.34, 8.35, 8.36, 9.39 (2X), 9.40 (3X), 19.76, 20.86; in
support, in favore, 21.89, 21.90; support (v.), favorire, 12.52 (2X), 20.86 (3X), 26.102. For
favore, favorire, see also favor
suspect (adj.), sospetto, suspetto, 3.9, 3.16, 14.58, 20.83 (2X), 20.84, 20.85 (2X), 21.89. For
sospetto, see also anticipation; fear
tax, dazio, 3.9, 16.63; taxes, taglie, 21.91, 26.102; rigorous with taxes, fiscale, 16.63. Cf.
ransom
teach, insegnare, 14.59, 18.69; teacher, precettore, 6.23, 18.69; teaching, precetto, 7.27,
18.69, 20.84
tell,* narrare, 12.49, 19.80, 21.89
temporal, temporale, 3.14, 11.45 (2X), 11.46, 12.52 (2X); temporize, temporeggiare, 2.6
terrible, terribile, 17.67, 26.104; terrifying, che lo sbigottisce, 19.73
test, esperienzia, 9.42. See also experience; experiment
Testament, Testamento, 13.56. Cf. testimony
testimony, testimone, ED. 3, 26.104. Cf. Testament
think, pensare, passim; thought, pensiero, 14.58, 14.59
thrust* (n.), impeto, 19.72. See also impetuosity
title, titulo, 19.78
town, terra, 10.43 (3X), 12.53 (2X), 14.59, 20.83, 20.84. See also land
troops, genti, gente, 12.50, 13.55, 25.100. See also man
trouble (v.),* scandolo, 3.12
trust (v.), confidare, 20.85, 22.93; trust (v.), fidarsi, 7.27, 7.29, 9.42, 12.49, 14.58, 20.87,
22.93; distrust (v.), dif idenzia, 20.83. For confidare, see also confidence; cf. faith; believe
true, truth, vero,* 3.8, 9.41, 12.49, 15.61, 17.68, 21.89 (2X), 23.94 (2X), 23.95, 25.98, 26.104;
truth, verità* 5.20, 15.61, 23.94
165
tumult, tumulto, 4.19, 7.28, 11.47 (2X)
uncle, zio, 8.35. Cf. nephew
undertaking, impresa, 8.37, 10.43, 26.103, 26.104. See also campaign; enterprise
union, unione, 7.29, 11.46; disunion, disunione, 7.29; unity, unità, 7.29
unite, unire, 10.44, 17.65, 20.84, 23.95; united, unito, 4.18, 13.55, 17.65, 17.67, 23.95;
united, uniti, 4.19; disunite, disunire, 12.48
universal, universale, 3.9. See also community; general
unlike, formed unlike, disforme, 19.75, 19.82. See also disparate; cf. conform
uprising, impeto, 20.87. See also impetuousity
upset (v.), turbassinarsi, 7.27
use, utile, 4.18; use, utilità, 20.85; useful, utile, 3.11, 13.54, 13.56, 14.59, 15.61, 18.70,
19.76, 20.86, 21.89 (2X), 22.93; useful, utilia (L), 20.83 (T); useless, inutile, 3.11, 12.48,
13.54, 19.82, 22.92; useless, inutilia (L), 20.83 (T). See also utility
usurper, usurpatore, 19.72
utility, utilità, 8.38, 17.67, 20.85. See also use
variation, variability, variazione, 18.70, 25.98, 25.99 (2X), 25.100. See also change;
instability
veneration, venerazione, 6.24; venerable, venerando, 11.47, 17.67, 19.77
vent, sfogare, 9.39, 19.76. See also satisfy
vice, vizio, 2.7, 15.62 (3X), 16.64
victor, vincitore, 4.18, 4.19, 13.54, 24.97; victor, victor (L), 21.90; victory, vittoria, 4.18
(2X), 4.19, 12.50, 13.55, 14.60, 21.90; most victorious, vittoriosissimo, 9.41. For vincitore,
see also win; cf. conquer; overcome
violate, sforzare, 12.53
violence, violenzia, 8.34, 9.39, 25.99; violent, rovinoso, 25.98
virtue, virtu, 1.6, 3.13, 4.19, 6.22 (4X), 6.23 (4X), 6.24, 6.25, 7.26 (4X), 7.27, 7.31 (2X), 8.34
(2X), 8.35 (3X), 8.37, 9.39, 11.45, 11.47, 12.51, 12.53, 13.55, 13.56, 13.57 (2X), 14.58,
15.62, 16.63, 17.67 (2X), 17.68, 19.75, 19.77, 19.78 (2X), 19.82, 21.91, 24.97, 25.98, 25.99,
26.102 (3X), 26.103, 26.104 (3X), 26.105; virtue, virtute (L), 6.21 (T); virtuous, virtuoso,
6.22, 7.27, 12.49, 12.51, 21.91, 24.96, 26.102; of virtue, virtuoso, 6.23; most virtuous,
virtuosissimo, 12.51; virtuously, virtuosamente, 16.63; most virtuously,
virtuosissimamente, 12.51. For virtu, see also strength
wanton, licenzioso, 25.98. See also license
war, guerra, 3.12 (2X), 3.13, 3.15 (2X), 3.16, 8.37, 12.48, 12.49 (2X), 12.50, 12.51 (2X), 12.52,
13.54, 13.56, 14.58, 14.59 (3X), 14.60, 16.63 (3X), 20.85, 20.87, 21.88 (2X), 21.89, 24.97,
26.103, 26.104; war, bellum (L), 26.103; war, bello (L), 21.90; very warlike, bellicosissimo,
19.80
way,* via,* 4.18, 21.90. Cf. path
weak, debole, 3.9, 3.14, 9.42, 11.46, 12.52, 20.84, 21.88; weaken, indebolire, 3.11, 7.28;
weaken, fare debole, 3.14; weaken, enervare, 13.57; weakness, debolezza, 20.85, 26.104
wealth, ricchezza, 22.93 (2X). See also rich
well-being, bene essere, 7.29, 12.48, 15.62
wicked, tristo, 17.67, 18.69. See also bad
166
will, arbitrio, 25.98, 26.103; will, voglia, 19.77; will, volontà, 7.26, 7.28, 9.42; good will,
benevoluto, 2.1; goodwill, benivolenzia, 19.73, 19.74; show good will, essere benivolo,
19.74; willingly, volentieri, 3.8, 3.11, 14.58; willing, volonteroso, 10.44; at his will, ad
votum (L), 18.70
win, vincere, 9.40, 12.51 (4X), 12.52, 13.54 (2X), 13.55 (3X), 13.56, 16.64, 18.71, 21.89 (3X),
21.90 (5X), 25.101; win over, guadagnarsi, 4.18, 7.31 (3X), 20.85; winner, vincitore,
21.89, 21.90. For vincere, vincitore, see also conquer; defeat; victory; for guadagnarsi, see
also gain
wise, savio, 3.12, 3.13, 9.42, 13.55, 13.57 (2X), 14.60, 17.68, 19.74, 20.84, 20.85, 21.90, 22.92,
23.94, 23.95 (2X); wisdom, sapere, 11.46; wisdom, sapienza, 16.65
woman, donna, 17.66, 19.72, 25.101 (2X). Cf. effeminate; Madonna
word, parola, ED. 4, 17.66
work (n.), opera, ED.3, ED.4; work (v.), operare, 14.58, 21.88, 25.99 (2X); act,* operare,
12.51, 18.70. For opera, see also deed; for operare, see also employ
world, mondo, 3.9, 18.70, 18.71, 19.79, 19.81; worldly things, cose del mondo, 10.44, 25.98
worthy, degno, ED.3; most worthy, valentissimo, 22.92; prove worthy, meritare, 6.25; be
worthy, riuscire valente, 12.50; be worthy, valsere, 20.87. For degno, meritare, see also
bought; deserve; merit; cf. dignity; disdain; indignation
write, scrivere, 6.25, 8.36, 14.60 (2X), 15.61 (3X), 18.69, 19.78; written above, soprascritto,
19.82, 20.84, 24.96; mentioned above, soprascritto, 2.6, 15.62, 16.62, 18.70 (2X), 19.71;
given above, soprascritto, 3.14; writer, scrittore, 14.59, 17.67, 18.69
young, giovane, 25.101; young, gioventù, 8.36
167
Notes
Dedicatory Letter
1. lit.: acquire grace. “Acquire” is an economic term that NM often uses to refer to
noneconomic gain, especially conquest—here, to the favor or grace that would seem to
be in the gift of a prince.
2. NM switches from a singular to the plural, a device he uses frequently.
3. Lorenzo de’ Medici (1492–1519), grandson of Lorenzo the Magnificent (1449–92);
he became duke of Urbino in 1516. NM had at first intended to dedicate The Prince to
Giuliano de’ Medici, son of Lorenzo the Magnificent and duke of Nemours, who died
in 1516. See NM’s letter to Vettori of December 10, 1513, printed in the Appendix.
4. servitù, a feudal term of submission elsewhere to be translated as “servitude.”
5. animo refers to the “spirit” with which human beings defend themselves, never to
a capacity for self-detachment (anima, “soul,” does not occur in The Prince). It can also
mean “mind” in the sense of “intent,” but not in the sense of “intellect.”
I. How Many Are the Kinds of Principalities and in What Modes
They Are Acquired
1. Chapter headings of The Prince are in Latin, the language of traditional learning
and of the Church.
2. stato means both status (see the Dedicatory Letter) and state, as today, but the
meanings are more closely connected; stato is the status of a person or a group while
dominating someone else. Although NM sometimes speaks of “the state,” he always
means someone’s state and does not refer to an impersonal state.
3. lit.: blood.
4. Francesco Sforza (1401–66), the mercenary captain, acquired Milan by betraying
and overthrowing the Ambrosian Republic of Milan in 1450. In 1447 he had laid claim
to Milan with a certain respect for its previous bloodline, through his marriage to
Bianca, daughter of Filippo Maria Visconti, then duke of Milan. See NM’s account in
Florentine Histories, V 13, VI 13, 17–22.
5. Ferdinand the Catholic, after agreeing by treaty in 1500 to share the kingdom of
Naples with Louis XII of France, drove out the French in 1504 and joined that kingdom
to Spain.
6. In this translation virtù is consistently rendered “virtue.”
168
II. Of Hereditary Principalities
1. A reference to NM’s other chief work, the Discourses on Livy, in which he reasons
with the use of materials from Livy’s history of the Roman republic, among other
sources. NM does in fact discuss republics in The Prince (e.g., on “the Romans,”
Chapter 3 below), but not “at length.”
2. lit.: blood.
3. industria for NM means diligence combined with skill or adroitness which is not
necessarily visible.
4. NM speaks of two dukes of Ferrara as if they were one: Ercole d’Este (1431–1505)
and his son Alfonso d’Este (1476–1534). Ercole was defeated by the Venetians in 1484,
and Alfonso was temporarily deprived of his principality by Pope Julius in 1510.
5. Of endere is not merely to slight, but to harm so as to cause offense.
6. A dentation is a toothed wall left on the side of a building so that another building
may be attached to it. NM’s metaphor compares the hereditary, or “natural,”
principality to a row of houses continually added to but never finished and, as it were,
not begun from the beginning.
III. Of Mixed Principalities
1. lit.: these are.
2. “Province” refers to a country or region that may be larger or smaller than a
“state.”
3. Ludovico Sforza, il Moro, was duke of Milan from 1494 until Milan was seized
from him in September 1499 by Louis XII. He recaptured Milan in February 1500 but
was betrayed by his Swiss mercenaries at Novara, when the French acquired it in April
“for the second time.” The French then lost Milan in 1512 after the battle of Ravenna to
the Holy League led by Pope Julius II, “the whole world.”
4. respettivo is also translated as “cautious”; see especially Chapter25.
5. Burgundy since 1477, Brittany 1491, Gascony 1453, and Normandy 1204.
6. lit.: scandals.
7. Of Louis XII, not of Charles VIII; the latter’s invasion of Italy in September 1494
lasted only until October 1495.
8. The formal or plural you.
9. Some manuscripts say one-third.
10. The kingdom of Naples, which had been held by Frederick of Aragon.
11. The kingdom of Naples, often styled “the Kingdom.”
12. Louis XII had obtained from the pope an annulment of his marriage to Jeanne de
Valois and a cardinalate (with hat) for his minister, Georges d’ Amboise, bishop of
Rouen.
13. See Chapter 18 below.
14. During NM’s first diplomatic mission to France; see his letter of November 21,
169
1500.
IV. Why the Kingdom of Darius Which Alexander Seized Did
Not Rebel from His Successors after Alexander’s Death
1. NM apparently refers to Alexander’s rapid occupation of “Asia” in seven years,
from 334 to 327 B.C., and its division among seven generals, eventually into eleven
kingdoms, after his death.
2. Administrative units.
3. The formal or plural you.
4. The formal or plural you.
5. Darius III (380–330 B.C.) was the king of Persia who lost his empire to Alexander
the Great.
6. The formal or plural you.
7. NM was pleased to call ancient Gaul by its modern name; see Discourses on Livy II
4.
8. Pyrrhus (319–272 B.C.), king of Epirus, captured Sicily and quickly lost it.
V. How Cities or Principalities Which Lived by Their Own Laws
before They Were Occupied Should Be Administered
1. In Athens the regime of Thirty Tyrants was established by Spartan direction in 404
B.C., then overthrown in 403. In Thebes the victorious Spartans established an
oligarchy in 382 B.C., which was overthrown by Pelopidas in 378.
2. Capua was destroyed by the Romans after its rebellion, in 211 B.C.; Carthage was
destroyed in 146 B.C.; and Numantia in 133 B.C.
3. Pisa was acquired by Florence in 1405 and lost in 1494 because of the invasion of
the king of France, Charles VIII.
VI. Of New Principalities That Are Acquired through One’s
Own Arms and Virtue
1. lit.: virtue.
2. The formal or plural you.
3. Or pray.
4. Savonarola (1452–98) was a Dominican friar who came to Florence to preach in
1481, and succeeded in convincing the Florentines, who thought themselves “neither
rude nor ignorant,” that “he spoke with God.” Cf. Discourses on Livy I 11, where NM
praises this accomplishment and does not refer, as he does here, to Savonarola’s
terrible end by burning at the stake.
170
5. Possible sources: Polybius, I 8, 16; VII 8; Livy XXIV 4; Justin, XXIII 4; I Samuel 18:
8. Cf. the Dedicatory Letter to the Discourses on Livy.
VII. Of New Principalities That Are Acquired by Others’ Arms
and Fortune
1. Darius I (521–486 B.C.), not Darius III of Chapter 4.
2. On the election of Roman emperors by soldiers, see Chapter 19.
3. Or time.
4. For this phrase see NM, Discourses on Livy I 41.
5. The Orsini and Colonna were the two principal noble families of Rome which had
long fought for control of Rome and the papacy.
6. October 9, 1502.
7. See NM’s narration of this event in “A Description of the Method Used by Duke
Valentino in Killing Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, and Others,” in Allan
Gilbert, trans., Chief Works of Machiavelli, 3 vols. (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press,
1965), 1:163–69.
8. power: potestà, not potenzia; the phrase recalls the papal claim of plenitudo potestatis.
9. lit.: offended.
10. assure himself of Spanish support, or against the French.
11. lit.: impetus.
12. potenzia.
13. Alexander or Cesare?
14. NM was in Rome at the time of the conclave that elected Julius II pope in
October-December 1503.
15. of endere (here and below) is not merely to slight, but to harm so as to cause
offense.
16. In this irreverent listing of cardinals, Giuliano della Rovere (who became Pope
Julius II) is named by his church in Rome, San Pietro in Vincoli; Giovanni Colonna;
Raffaelo Riario, named for San Giorgio; Ascanio Sforza.
17. Cardinal Georges d’Amboise, bishop of Rouen; see Chapter 3.
18. See NM, Discourses on Livy III 4.
VIII. Of Those Who Have Attained a Principality through
Crimes
1. See Discourses on Livy; note that NM does not say which of the two modes is
reasoned about more amply “where republics are treated.”
2. Agathocles lived from 361 to 289 B.C.; his tyranny began in 316.
3. Or principality; principato can mean the ruling or dominating office as well as the
realm of domination.
171
4. Oliverotto Euffreducci da Fermo, who took power in Fermo on December 26, 1501,
and a year later was strangled by order of Cesare Borgia at Sinigaglia.
5. A famous condottiere, he was hired by the Florentines and then beheaded by them
in 1499 for suspected treachery.
6. lit.: art.
7. lit.: reasonings.
8. lit.: offended.
9. See Discourses on Livy I 45.
IX. Of the Civil Principality
1. lit.: according to the subject.
2. NM considers Nabis a tyrant in Discourses on Livy I 10, 40; and in III 6 he tells how
Nabis was assassinated despite his popular support. He ruled Sparta from 205 to 192
B.c.
3. The Gracchi brothers Tiberius and Gaius Sempronius were tribunes of the plebs
but lost their lives to their enemies in the Senate, Tiberius in 133 and Gaius in 121 B.C.;
see Discourses on Livy I 37.
4. A head of the Ciompi rebellion in Florence (1378), who ruled for three years
thereafter and then was beheaded; see NM’s Florentine Histories III 18, 20.
5. lit.: the universal. NM, in accord with the usage of his time, says “universal” in
cases where we would expect “general,” since apparently not everyone (not to mention
everything) is meant.
X. In What Mode the Forces of All Principalities Should Be
Measured
1. lit.: a just army and make a day; see NM, Discourses on Livy II 17.
2. lit.: land or earth.
3. NM discussed the German cities in Discourses on Livy I 55; II pr., 19; and also in
two minor works, Rapporto delle cose della Magna and Ritratto delle cose della Magna.
4. lit.: orders.
5. lit.: charity.
XI. Of Ecclesiastical Principalities
1. Lisio and Bertelli read a singular “cause.”
2. Charles VIII, in 1494.
3. lit.: scandal.
4. Sixtus IV (1414–84), pope from 1471 to 1484. NM said of him in Florentine Histories
VII 22: “This pontiff was the first who began to show how much a pontiff could do and
172
how many things previously called errors could be hidden under pontifical authority.”
5. See NM, Florentine Histories I 23 (end).
6. NM omits Innocent VIII, pope from 1484 to 1492 between Sixtus IV and Alexander
VI (who was pope from 1492 to 1503).
7. Apparently the sale of ecclesiastical offices or indulgences.
8. Leo X, Giovanni de’ Medici, son of Lorenzo de’ Medici, pope from 1513 to 1521.
XII. How Many Kinds of Military There Are and Concerning
Mercenary Soldiers
1. See Chapter 7.
2. In the literal sense of “soldier”: in your pay.
3. The chalk used to designate which houses would lodge French soldiers along their
unresisted invasion route; the expression is attributed to Pope Alexander VI by the
French historian Philippe de Commines in his Memoirs.
4. This was Savonarola in his sermon of November 1, 1494, who said that the French
invasion was God’s punishment of Italy and Florence. See Discourses on Livy I 11, 45, 56
for more of NM on Savonarola, and I 21; II 18 on the sins of Italian princes.
5. lit.: external
6. The Mercenary War at the end of the First Punic War, 241–237 B.c.
7. After Epaminondas’s death in 362 B.C., Philip (who does not appear to have been
a mercenary captain) became king of Macedon in 359 and occupied Thebes in 338.
8. The battle of Caravaggio took place in 1448; see NM’s fuller account of Sforza’s
successful maneuver in Florentine Histories VI 18–22.
9. Muzio Attendolo Sforza (1369–1424); see Florentine Histories I 38.
10. NM’s rendering of the name of the English mercenary captain John Hawkwood.
11. Mercenaries of Andrea Fortebraccio, also known as Braccio da Montone; see
Florentine Histories I 38, V 2.
12. Francesco di Bussone, count of Carmagnola (C1380–1432); see Discourses on Livy
II 18.
13. Bartolomeo Colleoni, commander of the Venetian troops at Caravaggio (1448);
Roberto da San Severino, commanding in the war against Ferrara (1482–84); Niccolò
Orsini, count of Pitigliano, commanding at the battle of “Vailà” (Vailate) in 1509. See
Discourses on Livy 16, 53; III 31.
14. The formal or plural you.
15. Alberigo da Barbiano, count of Conio, died in 1409; on his Company of St.
George, see NM, Florentine Histories I 34.
16. condotta, a pun on the contract (condotta) by which a condottiere is hired.
XIII. Of Auxiliary, Mixed, and One’s Own Soldiers
173
1. In 1512.
2. In 1500.
3. Emperor John Cantacuzene, in 1353.
4. In Chapter 6.
5. NM’s account of this episode differs significantly from the biblical original in 1
Samuel 17: 38–40, 50–51.
6. lit.: ordered.
7. In Chapter 3, where NM referred to diseases, not to remedies.
8. One manuscript has “with faith” at this point.
9. Quoted by NM in Latin from Tacitus, Annals XIII. 19; the words rerum mortalium (”
of mortal things”) have been omitted by NM after “nothing.”
10. lit.: discourses on.
11. The four named in this chapter are Cesare Borgia, Hiero, David, and Charles VII.
In Chapter 6 NM mentions Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, and Theseus.
XIV. What a Prince Should Do Regarding the Military
1. Francesco Sforza’s “sons” (rather, his descendants) were Galeazzo Maria,
murdered in 1476; Gian Galeazzo, deposed by his uncle Ludovico il Moro in 1480; and
Ludovico il Moro, deposed in 1500. The emperor Maximilian I, deposed in 1515, may
perhaps be included.
2. lit.: speculate on.
3. On knowledge of the nature of sites as “science,” see Discourses on Livy III 39; and
see the Dedicatory Letter above.
4. Philopoemen (253–183 B.C.), a head of the Achaean League. The writers who
praise him are Livy (XXXV.28) and Plutarch (Life of Philopoemen, 4).
5. The title of Xenophon’s book is actually Cyropaideia, “The Education of Cyrus.”
XV. Of Those Things for Which Men And Especially Princes Are
Praised or Blamed
1. pietoso has a connotation of “pious.”
2. lit.: easy.
3. Or honestly.
4. Some manuscripts have infamia, “infamy.”
XVI. Of Liberality and Parsimony
1. lit.: offends.
2. Louis XII.
3. Ferdinand the Catholic.
174
XVII. Of Cruelty and Mercy, and Whether It Is Better to Be
Loved Than Feared, or the Contrary
1. Or piety, throughout The Prince.
2. From 1500 to 1502 Pistoia, a city subject to Florence, was torn by factional disputes
and riots. NM was there as representative of the Florentines on several occasions in
1501.
3. lit.: offend.
4. lit.: a whole universality.
5. lit.: offend.
6. Virgil, Aeneid I 563–64.
7. See Chapter 9.
8. lit.: blood.
9. lit.: blood.
10. On the comparison between Hannibal and Scipio, see also Discourses on Livy III
19–21. NM’s source is in Livy, XXIX 19, 21.
XVIII. In What Mode Faith Should Be Kept by Princes
1. The formal or plural you.
2. A possible source for this: Cicero, De Of iciis I. 11.34; 13.41.
3. lit.: universally.
4. lit.: touches.
5. One manuscript says “the few have no place there . . .”; and the authorities have
divided, Casella, Russo, and Sasso accepting “no place,” Chabod and Bertelli “a place.”
6. Apparently Ferdinand the Catholic, whom NM unhesitatingly names in Chapter
21.
XIX. Of Avoiding Contempt and Hatred
1. See Chapter 17 above.
2. lit.: universality.
3. Chapter 9 above, where Nabis is featured as a prince of a civil principality. NM
does not disclose here, as he does in Discourses on Livy III 6, that Nabis was in fact
killed by a conspiracy.
4. Chapters 16, 17.
5. lit.: by the universal.
6. See NM, Florentine Histories VI 9–10.
7. On the kingdom of France, see also Discourses on Livy I 16, 17, 55; and NM’s
Ritratto di cose di Francia.
8. Perhaps a reference to Louis IX, by whom the Parlement of Paris was organized
175
out of the preceding king’s court. Parlements in the French monarchy were law courts,
not legislative assemblies.
9. lit.: of the universal.
10. lit.: things of grace.
11. Alexander Severus.
12. università is singular here, according to some MSS accepted by Chabod; it is
plural and translated as “communities” in the next clause; università is derived from
the medieval Latin universitas, which means both a legal body or corporation and
(sometimes) the community on which such bodies depend. NM’s usage lacks the
legalism of medieval usage.
13. Chapter 15.
14. See note 12 above.
15. lit.: discoursing on.
16. Septimius Severus, who in Discourses on Livy I 10 is called a criminal.
17. The formal or plural you.
18. Chapter 18.
19. lit.: empire.
20. lit.: offend.
21. See also Discourses on Livy III 6, where NM says that the centurion was the
instrument or executive of another conspirator, Macrinus, who was Caracalla’s prefect
and is not said to have suffered “grave injury” from Caracalla. Macrinus proclaimed
himself emperor in 217 and was overthrown in 218.
22. lit.: being very base.
23. Apparently “the Turk” is Selim I, sultan of the Ottoman Turks from 1512 to 1520,
and “the Sultan” is the last sultan of the Mamelukes in Egypt, Tuman Bey, who was
overthrown by Selim I in 1517. Selim I is called “the Grand Turk” by NM in the
Discourses on Livy: see I 1, 19, 30; II 17; III 6, 35.
24. The formal or plural you.
XX. Whether Fortresses and Many Other Things Which Are
Made and Done by Princes Every Day Are Useful or Useless
1. See Chapter 12.
2. lit.: discoursing on.
3. On fortresses, see Discourses on Livy II 21, 24, 25; III 27, 37.
4. lit.: offend.
5. lit.: impetus.
6. This story is told in vivid detail in Discourses on Livy III 6 and Florentine Histories
VIII 34.
XXI. What a Prince Should Do to Be Held in Esteem
176
1. Both you’s in this sentence are the formal or plural you.
2. lit.: empire.
3. The Marranos, who were expelled from Spain in 1501–2 by Ferdinand, were Jews
and Moslems who had been forcibly converted to Christianity.
4. In 1512, when Ferdinand joined the Holy League.
5. Bernabò Visconti, duke of Milan from 1354 to 1385.
6. Or man, in some MSS.
7. lit.: good.
8. Quoted in Latin from Livy, Histories, XXXV. 49.
9. lit.: offend.
10. See Chapter 19, note 12.
XXII. Of Those Whom Princes Have as Secretaries
1. Antonio Giordani da Venafro (1459–1530), professor of law at the Studio of Siena.
2. This is the second time Petrucci has been called “prince of Siena” (cf. Chapter 20);
in Discourses on Livy III 6 he is called “tyrant of Siena.”
3. lit.: exalts.
XXIII. In What Mode Flatterers Are to Be Avoided
1. lit.: free will.
2. Luca Rinaldi, a bishop and ambassador of Emperor Maximilian I (1459–1519), with
whom NM became acquainted during his embassy to the emperor in 1508.
3. lit.: easy; see Chapter 15.
4. See NM’s similar description of Maximilian, in his Rapporto delle cose della Magna
(1508).
XXIV. Why the Princes of Italy Have Lost Their States
1. Most MSS omit “good friends.”
2. Frederick of Aragon, expelled from Naples in 1501 by Ferdinand the Catholic and
Louis XII, and dethroned.
3. Ludovico Sforza; see Chapter 3.
4. On Philip V of Macedonia (237–179 B.C.), see Discourses on Livy II 4, 10; III 10, 37.
XXV. How Much Fortune Can Do in Human Affairs, and in
What Mode It May Be Opposed
1. lit.: ordered.
177
2. Both you’s in this sentence are the formal or plural you.
3. lit.: universal.
4. lit.: respect; respetto is translated usually as “caution” and “hesitation,”
occasionally as “regard.”
5. The formal or plural you should be understood here.
6. lit.: reasonings.
7. See Discourses on Livy III 9.
XXVI. Exhortation to Seize Italy and to Free Her from the
Barbarians
1. See Chapter 6.
2. spirito, not animo.
3. Cardinal Giovanni de’ Medici, Lorenzo’s uncle, became Pope Leo X in 1513.
4. The formal or plural you.
5. Quoted in Latin from Livy IX. 1; see also Discourses on Livy III 12, and Florentine
Histories V 8, where the same quotation is used to emphasize necessity rather than
justice.
6. lit.: conducted.
7. These are references to miracles that occurred as Moses led the Israelites to the
promised land, just before the revelation at Mount Sinai. They are not given in the
same order as in the Bible, Exodus 14:21, 13:21, 17:6, 16:4.
8. Seven battles that were Italian defeats, from 1495 to 1513.
9. lit.: provinces.
10. April 11, 1512; see Chapter 3.
11. Petrarch, Italia mia, 93–96.
NICCOLÒ MACHIAVELLI TO FRANCESCO VETTORI,
FLORENCE, DECEMBER 10, 1513.
1. Petrarch, Triumph of Divinity, 13.
2. Perhaps a reference to NM’s imprisonment and torture in February and March of
1513.
3. Paradiso, V, 41–42.
4. Giuliano de’ Medici, the duke of Nemours, son of Lorenzo the Magnificent. He left
Florence in September of 1513 and was in Rome at the time of NM’s letter. He died in
1516, and NM decided to dedicate The Prince to Lorenzo de’ Medici, grandson of
Lorenzo the Magnificent, who became duke of Urbino in 1516.
5. The prison, because NM would be suspected of plotting with the Soderini for the
return of the previous regime.
6. Giuliano.
178
Index of Proper Names
References are solely to the text of The Prince, by chapter and page in this edition.
Achaeans, III 12; XIV 59; XXI 89
Achilles. Homer’s hero in the Iliad, XIV 60; XVIII 69
Acuto, Giovanni (John Hawkwood) (d.1394), English mercenary captain in the hire of
Florence 1377–93. XII 51
Aetolians, III 11, 12; XXI 89
Africa, VIII 35; XIX 81; XXI 88
Agathocles (361–289 B.C.), murderer and tyrant of Syracuse 316–289 B.C., VIII 34–35,
37, 38
Alba, VI 23
Alberigo da Conio (Alberigo da Barbiano) (d.1409), count of Conio (now Cunio),
mercenary captain who founded the Company of St. George, XII 52
Albinus, Clodius (d.197), Roman general tricked by Severus, XIX 78–79
Alessandria, battle of (1499), XXVI 104
Alexander the Great (356–323 B.C.), son of Philip II of Macedon and student of
Aristotle; king of Macedon 336–323 B.C.; defeated Darius III in 331 B.C., IV 16, 17, 19;
XIII 57; XIV 60; XVI 64; XXIV 97
Alexander Severus, Roman emperor 222–35, assassinated, XIX 75, 76, 77, 80, 82
Alexander VI (Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia), pope 1492–1503, father of Cesare Borgia, III
14, 15, 16; VII 27–28, 30, 31, 32; VIII 35, 37; XI 45, 46–47; XVIII 70
Alexandria, XIX 79
Antiochus the Great, king of Syria 223–187 B.C., III 12, 13; XXI 89
Antoninus Caracalla, Roman emperor 211–217, assassinated, XIX 75, 77–78, 79, 80, 82
Antonio da Venafro (Antonio Giordani da Venafro) (1459–1530), professor of law at the
Studio of Siena, XXII 92
Aquileia, XIX 81
Aragon, king of (Alfonso V) (1396–1458), king of Aragon 1416–58 and king of Naples
and Sicily, XII 50
Ascanio (Ascanio Sforza) (1455–1505), cardinal offended by Cesare Borgia, VII 33
Asia, IV 17, 19; XIX 78
Athenians, VI 23; XXVI 102
Athens, V 20
Baglioni, the, family powerful in Perugia, VII 32
Bartolomeo da Bergamo (Bartolomeo Colleoni) (1400–1475), mercenary captain for the
Venetians, XII 52
181
Bentivogli, the, family powerful in Bologna, XIX 74; XX 86
Bentivoglio, Annibale (d.1445), and “the present” Annibale, his grandson (1469–1540),
princes in Bologna, XIX 74
Bentivoglio, Giovanni (1443–1508), prince in Bologna, a baby when his father Annibale
was killed in 1445 (Santi Bentivoglio of Florence, presumed natural son of the cousin
of Annibale, ruled in his stead from 1446 to 1462), driven out of Bologna by Julius II
in 1506, III 13; XIX 74; XXV 100
Bernabò da Milano (Bernabò Visconti) (1323–85), duke of Milan 1354–85, imprisoned
and poisoned by his nephew Gian Galeazzoin 1385, XXI 89
Bologna, VII 28; XI 47; XIX 74; XX 86; XXV 100
Bologna, battle of (1511), XXVI 104
Borgia, Cesare (1475–1507), natural son of Pope Alexander VI, III 16; VII 26; VIII 37; XIII
55; XVII 65; XX 86, 87. See also Valentino, duke of
Bracceschi, the, Mercenaries of Andrea Fortebraccio, also known as Braccio da
Montone (1368–1424); defeated by Francesco Sforza at Aquila in 1424 and killed, XII
51
Braccio da Montone, XII 51, 53
Brittany, III 9
Burgundy, III 9
Caesar, Julius (100–44 B.C.), assassinated, XIV 60; XVI 64
Caesar, title of, XIX 78
Camerino, lord of (Giulio Cesare da Varano), III 13
Canneschi, the, powerful family in Bologna; killed Annibale Bentivoglio in 1445 and
were killed by the people, XIX 74
Capua, V 20
Capua, battle of (1501), XXVI 104
Caravaggio, battle of (1448), XII 50
Cardinals, College of, VII 31
Carmagnola, count of (Francesco di Bussone) (c. 1380–1432), condottiere tricked and
executed by the Venetians in 1432, XII 51–52
Carthage, V 20
Carthaginians, VIII 35; XII 50
Castile, XXI 88
Cesena, VII 30
Charles VII (1403–61), king of France (1422–61), XIII 56, 57
Charles VIII (1470–98), king of France (1483–98); invaded Italy in 1494, III 13; XI 45; XII
49, 53
Chiron the centaur, XVIII 69
Christian pontificate, XIX 82
Christians, XXI 88
Church, the, III 14, 15, 16; VII 27, 28, 30; XI 45, 46–47; XII 51, 52; XXI 88; XXVI 102
Città di Castello, XX 86
182
Colonna, the, powerful Roman family hostile to the Orsini and to the Borgias, VII
27–28; XI 46, 47
Colonna, Giovanni (d.1508), cardinal whom Cesare Borgia offended, VII 33
Commodus, Roman emperor 180–93, assassinated, XIX 75, 77–78, 80, 82
Constantinople, emperor of (John Cantacuzene) (1291–1380), XIII 54
Cyrus (559–529 B.C.), founder of the Persian monarchy, subject of Xenophon’s
Cyropaideia, VI 22–23, 24; XIV 60; XVI 64; XXVI 102
Darius I (521–486 B.C.), king of Persia, VII 26
Darius III (380–330 B.C.), last king of Persia, 336–331 B.C., murdered by his own
followers in 330 B.C., IV 16, 18–19
David, XIII 56
Dido, XVII 66
Egypt, VI 23; XXVI 102
Epaminondas, the Theban (d.362 B.C.), XII 50
Fabius Maximus (Quintus Fabius Maximus Cunctator) (d.203 B.C.), the “delayer” in his
tactics against Hannibal, XVII 68
Faenza, lord of (Astorgio Manfredi) (1488–1502), defeated by Cesare Borgia and
strangled in Rome in 1502, III 13
Faenza, VII 27, 28
Ferdinand the Catholic (1452–1516), also Ferdinand II of Aragon and V of Castile, who
unified the kingdom of Spain; married Isabella I of Castile; drove the Moors out of
Spain in 1492 and the Marranos in 1501–2; drove the French out of the kingdom of
Naples in 1504; became king of Naples in 1505, XII 53; XIII 54; XXI 88
Fermo, VIII 36, 37
Ferrara, duke of, Ercole d’Este (1431–1505), followed by his son Alfonso d’Este (1476–
1534), II 7; III 13
Ferrara, XI 46; XIII 54
Filippo, Duke (Filippo Maria Visconti) (1392–1447), duke of Milan 1412–47, XII 50
Florence, IX 41; XIX 74
Florentines, III 13; V 21; VII 31; XI 45–46; XII 50–51; XIII 54; XVII 65; XXI 91
Fogliani, Giovanni, leading citizen of Fermo, killed in 1502, VIII 36–37
Forli, Madonna of (Caterina Sforza) (1463–1509), countess of Forlì, natural daughter of
Galeazzo Sforza; married Girolamo Riario, count of Forlì, and after her husband was
assassinated in 1488 held that state until it was taken by Cesare Borgia in 1500, III 13;
XX 87
Forlì, XIII 55
France, king of, III 9; IV 17; VII 30; XI 45; XVI 63; XXV 100, 101
France (king of), III 9, 13, 15, 16; IV 18; VII 28, 29, 30, 31; XXI 90; XXV 100
France (as Gaul), IV 19
France, kingdom or country of, III 9; IV 18, 19; VII 33; XIII 56, 57; XIX 74, 79; XXI 88;
183
XXV 99
French, III 16; VII 27–28, 29, 30, 31; XI 46, 47; XIII 54, 55, 56; XXVI 105
Gaeta, VII 30
Gascony, III 9
Genoa, III 13
Genoa, battle of (1507), XXVI 104
Germans, XXVI 105
Germany X 43; XXV 99
Ghibelline sect, partisans of the Holy Roman Emperor, XX 84
Giovanna II (1373–1435), queen of Naples 1414–35, XII 50
Girolamo, Count (Girolamo Riario) (d.1488), count of Forlì, husband of Caterina Sforza;
murdered in 1488, XX 87
Goliath, XIII 56
Goths, XIII 57
Gracchi, the (Tiberius and Gaius Sempronius), brothers, tribunes of the plebs, lost their
lives to their enemies in the Senate, Tiberius in 133 and Gaius in 121 B.C., IX 41
Granada, XXI 88
Greece, III 10, 11, 12, 13; IV 19; V 20; VII 26; IX 41; XIII 54–55; XXI 89; XXIV 97
Guelf sect, partisans of the pope, XX 84
Guidobaldo Montefeltro, duke of Urbino from 1482 to 1508, son of Federigo, a
mercenary captain, XX 86
Hamilcar Barca (d.229 B.C.), Carthaginian commander in Sicily, father of Hanmbal,
VIII 34
Hannibal (247–182 B.C.), Carthaginian general and greatest enemy of Rome; took
poison to escape the Romans in 182 B.C., XVII 67
Hebrews, XXVI 102
Heliogabalus, Roman emperor 218–222, assassinated, XIX 75, 81
Hellespont, the, VII 26
Hiero II of Syracuse (306–215 B.C.), became king in 270, VI 25; XIII 55
Imola, XIII 55
Ionia, VII 26
Israel, VI 23; XXVI 102
Italians, III 16; XXVI 102–5
Italy, II 7; III 9, 13–16; VII 27–28; XI 45–47; XII 49, 51, 52–53; XIII 55; XIX 78, 81; XX 84;
XXI 88; XXIV 96; XXV 99; XXVI 101–5
Julianus, Roman emperor in 193, murdered, XIX 75, 78, 81
Julius II (Giuliano della Rovere) (1443–1513), cardinal of San Pietro ad Vincula, pope
1503–13, II 7; VII 32, 33; XI 47; XIII 54; XVI 63; XXV 100
Kingdom (of Naples), III 15; XXVI 102. See also Naples, kingdom of
184
Leo X (Giovanni de’ Medici) (1475–1521), son of Lorenzo de’ Medici; pope from 1513 to
1521, XI 47
Liverotto da Fermo (Oliverotto Euffreducci da Fermo) (1475–1502), strangled at
Sinigaglia, VIII 35–37
Locrians, XVII 68
Lombardy, III 13–14, 15, 16; XII 51; XXI 91; XXVI 102
Louis XI (1423–83), king of France 1461–83, XIII 56
Louis XII (1462–1515), king of France 1498–1515, succeeding Charles VIII, III 8, 13–16;
VII 28; XII 53
Lucca, VII 31
Luccans, III 13
Macedonians, III 12
Macrinus, Roman emperor 217–218, executed, XIX 75, 81
Magione, VII 28
Mantua, marquis of (Francesco Gonzaga) (1484–1519), III 13
Marcus Aurelius, Roman emperor, “the philosopher,” who reigned from 161 to 180,
XIX 75, 76–77, 80, 82
Marranos, XXI 88
Maximilian I (1459–1519), Holy Roman Emperor 1493–1519, XXIII 94
Maximinus, Roman emperor 235–238, assassinated, XIX 75, 77–78, 80–81, 82
Medes, VI 23; XXVI 102
Medici, Lorenzo de’ (1492–1519), grandson of Lorenzo the Magnificent (1449–92);
became duke of Urbino in 1516, DL 3
Mestre, battle of (1513), XXVI 104
Milan, duke of; VII 27; XI 45; XII 51; XIV 58; XXI 90; XXIV 96
Milan, I5; III 8, 9, 14; VII 26, 28; XX 87
Milanese, XII 50
Moses (c.1300 B.C.), VI 22, 23, 24; XXVI 102
Nabis (d.192 B.C.), torturer and tyrant of Sparta from 207 to 192 B.C., when he was
assassinated, IX 41; XIX 72
Nantes, III 16
Naples, king of, XI 45; XXIV 96
Naples, kingdom of, I 5; III 14–15; VII 30; XII 51; XXV 100. See also Kingdom (of Naples)
Niger, Pescennius (d.193), Roman general, defeated by Severus and executed, XIX
78–79
Normandy, III 9
Numantia, V 20
Old Testament, XIII 56
Orco, Remirro de (Don Ramiro de Lorqua), Spanish captain and majordomo of Cesare
Borgia, appointed governor of Romagna in 1501, found in two pieces in 1502, VII
185
29–30
Orsini, the, powerful Roman family hostile to the Colonna and to the Borgias, VII
27–29, 32; VIII 37; XI 46, 47; XIII 55
Orsini, Paolo (d.1503), tricked by Cesare Borgia at Sinigaglia and strangled, VII 29
Persians, VI 23; XXVI 102
Pertinax, Roman emperor 192, murdered, XIX 75, 76–77, 78, 82
Perugia, VII 31
Pesaro, lord of (Giovanni di Costanzo Sforza) (1466–1510), defeated by Cesare Borgia in
1500, III 13
Petrarch, Francesco (1304–74), XXVI 105
Petrucci, Pandolfo (1452–1512), prince of Siena 1500–1512, XX 85; XXII 92
Philip II of Macedon, king of Macedon 359–336 B.C., father of Alexander the Great, XII
50; XIII 57
Philip V of Macedon (237–179 B.C.), king of Macedon 221–179 B.C., III 12, 13; XXIV 97
Philistine, XIII 56
Philopoemen of Megalopolis (253–182 B.C.), a general of the Achaean League,
poisoned to death in Messene, XIV 59
Piombino, lord of (Iacopo IV degli Appiani), III 13
Piombino, VII 31
Pisa, V 21; VII 31; XII 51; XIII 54, XX 84
Pisans, III 13
Pistoıa, XVII 65; XX 84
Pitigliano, count of (Niccolò Orsini) (1442–1510), mercenary captain for the Venetians,
XII 52
Pyrrhus (319–272 B.C.), king of Epirus, IV 19
Ravenna, battle of (1512), XIII 54; XXVI 105
Rimini, lord of (Pandolfo Malatesta) (d.1534), defeated by Cesare Borgia in 1500, III 13
Rimini, VII 27
Rinaldi, Luca, bishop and ambassador of Maximilian I, XXIII 94
Roberto da San Severino (1418–87), mercenary captain for the Venetians, XII 52
Roman Empire, XIII 57; XIX 81
Romagna, III 14, 15; VII 28–29, 31–32; XI 47; XII 53; XIII 55; XVII 65
Romans, III 11–13; IV 19; V 20; XII 50; XIX 75–82; XXI 89–90; XXIV 97
Rome, VI 23; VII 31, 32; IX 41; XI 46, 47; XII 50; XVI 64; XIX 78, 79, 80–81; XXV 101
Romulus (c.735 B.C.), legendary founder and first king of Rome, VI 22, 23, 24
Rouen, cardinal of (Georges d’Amboise) (1460–1510), bishop of Rouen and minister of
Louis XII, created cardinal by Alexander VI in 1498, III 15, 16; VII 33
San Giorgio, church of Cardinal Raffaelo Riario, whom Cesare Borgia offended, VII 33
San Piero ad Vincula (San Pietro ad Vincula), church of Giuliano della Rovere in Rome,
VII 33
186
Saul, XIII 56
Savonarola, Girolamo (1452–98), Dominican friar who came to Florence to preach in
1481 and attracted many supporters and much political influence, 1494–97; burned at
the stake in 1498, VI 24
Scali, Giorgio, head of the plebian Ciompi rebellion in 1378, beheaded in 1382, IX 41
Scipio Africanus Major, P. Cornelius (236–182 B.C.), conqueror of Hannibal and
Carthage, XIV 60; XVII 68
Senate, XVII 68; XIX 78, 81
Severus (Septimius Severus), Roman emperor 193–211, XIX 75, 77–79, 82
Sforza, Francesco (1401–66), mercenary captain; acquired Milan by betraying and
overthrowing the Ambrosian Republic of Milan in 1450, 15; VII 26; XII 50, 51, 53; XIV
58; XX 87
Sforza, Ludovico, il Moro (1450–1510), son of Francesco Sforza; duke of Milan 1494–
1500, III 8, 9
Sforza, Muzio Attendolo (1369–1424), condottiere, father of Francesco, XII 50
Sicily, VIII 34, 35
Siena, VII 31; XX 85
Sienese, III 13
Sinigaglia (now Senigallia), scene on December 31, 1502, of Cesare Borgia’s arrest and
murder of the condottieri whom he had tricked into coming there, VII 29; VIII 37
Sixtus IV (1414–84), pope from 1471 to 1484, XI 46
Slavonia, XIX 78
Spain, king of, I 5; III 14; XVI 64; XXI 88; XXV 100
Spain (king of), III 15, 16; XXI 91; XXV 100
Spain, kingdom of, IV 19; XVII 68; XXV 99
Spanish, VII 30, 31, 33; XXVI 104–5
Sparta, XII 50
Spartans, V 20; IX 41
Sultan, the, Sultan of the Mamelukes in Egypt, XIX 81
Swiss, XII 50, 53; XIII 54, 56; XXVI 104–5
Syracusans, VI 25; XIII 56
Syracuse, VI 25; VIII 34, 35
Taro, battle of (1495), XXVI 104
Thebans, XII 50
Thebes, V 20
Theseus (c.1200 B.C.), legendary hero and founder–king of Athens, VI 22, 23, 24; XXVI
102
Thrace, XIX 80
Titus Quintius, Flamininus (d.174 B.C.), Roman consul 198 B.C.; defeated Philip V of
Macedon at the battle of Cynoscephalae in 197, XXIV 97
Turk, the, emperor of the Ottoman Empire, III 10; IV 17–18, 19; XIX 81
Turks, XIII 54
187
Tuscans, XV 61
Tuscany, III 14; VII 28, 31; XIV 59; XXVI 102
Urbino, VII 28, 29
Vailà (Vailate), also known as the battle of Agnadello (1509), XII 52; XX 84; XXVI 104
Valentino, duke of, Cesare Borgia as called by the people, III 16; by the vulgar, VII
26–27; XI 46. See also Borgia, Cesare
Venetians, II 7; III 13–15; VII 27–28; XI 45–47; XII 50, 51–52; XX 84–85; XXI 90; XXV 100
Virgil (70–20 B.C.), XVII 66
Vitelli, the, powerful family of condottieri in Città di Castello, VII 32; VIII 37; XIII 55;
XX 86
Vitelli, Niccolò (1414–86), mercenary captain, father of Paolo and Vitellozzo; expelled
from Città di Castello in 1474 by Pope Sixtus IV; on his return in 1482, destroyed the
pope’s two fortresses, XX 86
Vitelli, Paolo (d.1499), a famous condottiere hired by the Florentines and beheaded by
them in 1499, VIII 36; XII 51
Vitelli, Vitellozzo (d. 1502), brother of Paolo; strangled by Cesare Borgia at Sinigaglia,
VIII 36, 37
Xenophon (C.430–C.360 B.C.), Socratic philosopher, XIV 60
188